SEC. 8.3
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
585
8.3.2 Network Services and Protocols
All computer networks provide certain services to their users (hosts and 
processes), which they implement using certain rules about legal message exchanges.
Below we will give a brief introduction to these topics.
Network Services
Computer networks provide services to the hosts and processes using them.
Connection-oriented service is modeled after the telephone system. To talk to
someone, you pick up the phone, dial the number, talk, and then hang up. 
Similarly, to use a connection-oriented network service, the service user first establishes
a connection, uses the connection, and then releases the connection. The essential
aspect of a connection is that it acts like a tube: the sender pushes objects (bits) in
at one end, and the receiver takes them out in the same order at the other end.
In contrast, connectionless service is modeled after the postal system. Each
message (letter) carries the full destination address, and each one is routed through
the system independent of all the others. Normally, when two messages are sent to
the same destination, the first one sent will be the first one to arrive. Howev er, it is
possible that the first one sent can be delayed so that the second one arrives first.
With a connection-oriented service this is impossible.
Each service can be characterized by a quality of service. Some services are
reliable in the sense that they nev er lose data. Usually, a reliable service is 
implemented by having the receiver confirm the receipt of each message by sending
back a special acknowledgement packet so the sender is sure that it arrived. The
acknowledgement process introduces overhead and delays, which are necessary to
detect packet loss, but which do slow things down.
A typical situation in which a reliable connection-oriented service is 
appropriate is file transfer. The owner of the file wants to be sure that all the bits arrive 
correctly and in the same order they were sent. Very few file-transfer customers would
prefer a service that occasionally scrambles or loses a few bits, even if it is much
faster.
Reliable connection-oriented service has two relatively minor variants: 
message sequences and byte streams. In the former, the message boundaries are 
preserved. When two 1-KB messages are sent, they arrive as two distinct 1-KB 
messages, never as one 2-KB message. In the latter, the connection is simply a stream
of bytes, with no message boundaries. When 2K bytes arrive at the receiver, there
is no way to tell if they were sent as one 2-KB message, two 1-KB messages, 2048
1-byte messages, or something else. If the pages of a book are sent over a network
to an imagesetter as separate messages, it might be important to preserve the 
message boundaries. On the other hand, with a terminal logging into a remote server
system, a byte stream from the terminal to the computer is all that is needed. There
are no message boundaries here.
