478
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
but the way we use it today is a little different. The main idea is that a VMM 
(Virtual Machine Monitor) creates the illusion of multiple (virtual) machines on the
same physical hardware. A VMM is also known as a hypervisor. As discussed in
Sec. 1.7.5, we distinguish between type 1 hypervisors which run on the bare metal,
and type 2 hypervisors that may make use of all the wonderful services and
abstractions offered by an underlying operating system. Either way, virtualization
allows a single computer to host multiple virtual machines, each potentially 
running a completely different operating system.
The advantage of this approach is that a failure in one virtual machine does not
bring down any others. On a virtualized system, different servers can run on 
different virtual machines, thus maintaining the partial-failure model that a 
multicomputer has, but at a lower cost and with easier maintainability. Moreover, we can
now run multiple different operating systems on the same hardware, benefit from
virtual machine isolation in the face of attacks, and enjoy other good stuff.
Of course, consolidating servers like this is like putting all your eggs in one
basket. If the server running all the virtual machines fails, the result is even more
catastrophic than the crashing of a single dedicated server. The reason 
virtualization works, however, is that most service outages are due not to faulty hardware,
but to ill-designed, unreliable, buggy, and poorly configured software, 
emphatically including operating systems. With virtual machine technology, the only 
software running in the highest privilege mode is the hypervisor, which has two orders
of magnitude fewer lines of code than a full operating system, and thus two orders
of magnitude fewer bugs. A hypervisor is simpler than an operating system
because it does only one thing: emulate multiple copies of the bare metal (most
commonly the Intel x86 architecture, although ARM is becoming popular in 
datacenters also).
Running software in virtual machines has still other advantages in addition to
strong isolation. One of them is that having fewer physical machines saves money
on hardware and electricity and takes up less rack space. For a company such as
Amazon, Google or Microsoft, which may have hundreds of thousands of servers
doing a huge variety of different tasks at each data center, reducing the physical
demands on their data centers represents a huge cost savings. In fact, server 
companies sometimes locate their data centers in the middle of nowhere—just to be
close to, say, hydroelectric dams (and cheap energy). Virtualization also helps in
trying out new ideas. Typically, in large companies, individual departments or
groups think of an interesting idea and then go out and buy a server to implement
it. If the idea catches on and hundreds or thousands of servers are needed, the 
corporate data center expands. It is often hard to move the software to existing 
machines because each application often needs a different version of the operating
system, its own libraries, configuration files, and more. With virtual machines,
each application can take its own environment with it.
Another advantage of virtual machines is that checkpointing and migrating 
virtual machines (e.g., for load balancing across multiple servers) is much easier than
