SEC. 11.10
VIRTUALIZATION IN WINDOWS
1011
11.10.2 Containers
Hardware-based virtualization is very powerful but sometimes provides more
isolation than desired. In many cases, it is preferable to have more fine-grained 
virtualization. Windows 10 added support for containers which leverages fine-grained
software virtualization. This section will investigate a few uses for more 
finegrained virtualization and then examine how it is implemented.
Earlier in Sec. 11.2.1 the modern app architecture was discussed, one of the
benefits being reliable install/uninstall and the ability to deliver apps via the 
Microsoft Store. In Windows 8, only modern apps were delivered via the store—leaving
out the enormous library of existing Windows applications. Microsoft wanted to
provide a way for software vendors to package their existing applications to be
delivered from the store while maintaining the benefits the store was meant to 
provide. The solution was to encourage applications to be distributed via MSIX 
packages and allow the installation of the application to be virtualized. Rather than
requiring an installer to modify the file system and registry to install the app, those
modifications would be virtualized. When the application is launched, the system
creates a container with an alternate view of the file system and registry namespace
that make it look like the application has been installed (to the application about to
be run). If the user decides to uninstall the application, the MSIX package is 
deleted, but there is no longer a need to go and remove application files and state
from the file system and registry.
Windows 10 also introduced a feature similar to Linux containers, known as
Windows Server Containers. A Windows Server Container provides an 
environment that looks like a  full virtual machine. The container gets its own IP address,
can have its own computer name on the network, its own set of user accounts, etc.
However, a Windows Server Container is much lighter weight than a VM because
it shares the kernel with the host, only the user mode processes are replicated.
These types of containers do not provide the same level of isolation as a VM but
provide a very convenient deployment model and reduce the concern of running
two applications that normally could not coexist.
Namespace Virtualization
The underlying technology that containers build on is known as namespace 
virtualization. Rather than virtualizing hardware, as VMs do, containers make it 
possible for one or more processes to run with a slightly different view of various
namespaces.
To provide namespace virtualization support, Windows 10 introduced the
notions of Silos. Silos are an extension to the job object (see Sec. 11.4.1) that
allow for namespace virtualization. Silos make it possible to provide alternative
views of namespaces to the processes running within them. Silos are the 
fundamental building block for implementing container support in Windows. There are
