SEC. 4.2
DIRECTORIES
277
4.2.4 Directory Operations
The allowed system calls for managing directories exhibit more variation from
system to system than system calls for files. To giv e an impression of what they
are and how they work, we will give a sample (taken from UNIX).
1.
Create. A directory is created. It is empty except for dot and dotdot,
which are put there automatically by the mkdir program.
2.
Delete. A directory is deleted. Only an empty directory can be
deleted. A directory containing only dot and dotdot is considered
empty as these cannot be deleted.
3.
Opendir. Directories can be read. For example, to list all the files in a
directory, a listing program opens the directory to read out the names
of all the files it contains. Before a directory can be read, it must be
opened, analogous to opening and reading a file.
4.
Closedir. When a directory has been read, it should be closed to free
up internal table space.
5.
Readdir. This call returns the next entry in an open directory. 
Formerly, it was possible to read directories using the usual read system
call, but that approach has the disadvantage of forcing the 
programmer to know and deal with the internal structure of directories.
In contrast, readdir always returns one entry in a standard format, no
matter which of the possible directory structures is being used.
6.
Rename. In many respects, directories are just like files and can be
renamed the same way files can be.
7.
Link. Linking is a technique that allows a file to appear in more than
one directory. This system call specifies an existing file and a path
name, and creates a link from the existing file to the name specified
by the path. In this way, the same file may appear in multiple 
directories. A link of this kind, which increments the counter in the file’s
i-node (to keep track of the number of directory entries containing the
file), is sometimes called a hard link.
8.
Unlink. A directory entry is removed. If the file being unlinked is
only present in one directory (the normal case), it is removed from the
file system. If it is present in multiple directories, only the path name
specified is removed. The others remain. In UNIX, the system call
for deleting files (discussed earlier) is, in fact, unlink.
The above list gives the most important calls, but there are a few others as well, for
example, for managing the protection information associated with a directory.
