402
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
do not have buttons, but pressing the trackpad down hard acts like a button press.
Apple MacBooks work this way.
There are two kinds of trackpads in common use. The first one uses conductive
sensing. With these devices there is a series of very fine parallel wires running
from the front edge of the device toward the screen. Below it is an insulating layer.
Below that is another set of very fine wires running perpendicular to the other set,
from left to right. In some devices the layers are reversed.
When the user presses down on the trackpad, the gap between them gets 
smaller, allowing electricity to flow at the contact point. The hardware in the trackpad
can detect this and pass the coordinates where contact is made to the device driver.
The other kind of trackpad uses capacitance. This type is more common in
modern notebooks. In this system, tiny capacitors are constantly charging and 
discharging. When a finger touches the surface, the capacitance increases locally at
the point where the finger is and the hardware outputs the coordinates to the driver.
For this type of trackpad, pressing it with a pencil, pen, eraser, or piece of plastic
has no effect because these objects do not have capacitance, as the human body
does. So if you want to write all over your trackpad with a pen, you can (although
we do not recommend it), but doing so will not move the cursor. As a homework
exercise, try licking your trackpad. It should move the cursor as tongues have
capacitance.
The touch screens used on smartphones are similar to trackpads. We will 
discuss them later in this chapter.
5.6.2 Output Software
Now let us consider output software. First we will look at simple output to a
text window, which is what programmers normally prefer to use. Then we will
consider graphical user interfaces, which other users often prefer.
Text Windows
Output is simpler than input when the output is sequentially in a single font,
size, and color. For the most part, the program sends characters to the current 
window and they are displayed there. Usually, a block of characters, for example, a
line, is written in one system call.
Screen editors and many other sophisticated programs need to be able to
update the screen in complex ways such as replacing one line in the middle of the
screen. To accommodate this need, most output drivers support a series of 
commands to move the cursor, insert and delete characters or lines at the cursor, and so
on. These commands are often called escape sequences. In the heyday of the 
simple text-only 25 × 80 ASCII terminal, there were hundreds of terminal types, each
