82
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
possible applications for each of these systems (at least one for each of the operating
systems types).
3. What is the difference between timesharing and multiprogramming systems?
4. To use cache memory, main memory is divided into cache lines, typically 32 or 64
bytes long. An entire cache line is cached at once. What is the advantage of caching an
entire line instead of a single byte or word at a time?
5. On early computers, every byte of data read or written was handled by the CPU (i.e.,
there was no DMA). What implications does this have for multiprogramming?
6. Instructions related to accessing I/O devices are typically privileged instructions, that
is, they can be executed in kernel mode but not in user mode. Give a reason why these
instructions are privileged.
7. The family-of-computers idea was introduced in the 1960s with the IBM System/360
mainframes. Is this idea now dead as a doornail or does it live on?
8. One reason GUIs were initially slow to be adopted was the cost of the hardware 
needed to support them. How much video RAM is needed to support a 25-line × 80-row
character monochrome text screen? How much for a 1200 × 900-pixel 24-bit color 
bitmap? What was the cost of this RAM at 1980 prices ($5/KB)? How much is it now?
9. There are several design goals in building an operating system, for example, resource
utilization, timeliness, robustness, and so on. Give an example of two design goals that
may contradict one another.
10. What is the difference between kernel and user mode? Explain how having two distinct
modes aids in designing an operating system.
11. A 255-GB disk has 65,536 cylinders with 255 sectors per track and 512 bytes per 
sector. How many platters and heads does this disk have? Assuming an average cylinder
seek time of 11 msec, average rotational delay of 7 msec and reading rate of 100
MB/sec, calculate the average time it will take to read 400 KB from one sector.
12. Which of the following instructions should be allowed only in kernel mode?
(a) Disable all interrupts.
(b) Read the time-of-day clock.
(c) Set the time-of-day clock.
(d) Change the memory map.
13. Consider a system that has two CPUs, each CPU having two threads (hyperthreading).
Suppose three programs, P0, P1, and P2, are started with run times of 5, 10 and 20
msec, respectively. How long will it take to complete the execution of these programs?
Assume that all three programs are 100% CPU bound, do not block during execution,
and do not change CPUs once assigned.
14. A computer has a pipeline with four stages. Each stage takes the same time to do its
work, namely, 1 nsec. How many instructions per second can this machine execute?
15. Consider a computer system that has cache memory, main memory (RAM) and disk,
and an operating system that uses virtual memory. It takes 1 nsec to access a word
from the cache, 10 nsec to access a word from the RAM, and 10 msec to access a word
