2
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
The program that users interact with, usually called the shell when it is text based
and the GUI (Graphical User Interface) (which is pronounced ‘‘gooey’’) when it
uses icons, is actually not part of the operating system, although it uses the 
operating system to get its work done.
A simple overview of the main components under discussion here is given in
Fig. 1-1. Here we see the hardware at the bottom. The hardware consists of chips,
boards, Flash drives, disks, a keyboard, a monitor, and similar physical objects. On
top of the hardware is the software. Most computers have two modes of operation:
kernel mode and user mode. The operating system, the most fundamental piece of
software, runs in kernel mode (also called supervisor mode) for at least some of
its functionality. In this mode, it has complete access to all the hardware and can
execute any instruction the machine is capable of executing. The rest of the 
software runs in user mode, in which only a subset of the machine instructions is
available. In particular, those instructions that affect control of the machine, 
determine the security boundaries, or do I/O (Input/Output) are forbidden to 
usermode programs. We will come back to the difference between kernel mode and
user mode repeatedly throughout this book. It plays a crucial role in how operating
systems work.
Hardware
Software
User mode
Kernel mode
Operating system
Web!
browser
E-mail!
reader
Music!
player
User interface program
Figure 1-1. Where the operating system fits in.
The user interface program, shell or GUI, is the lowest level of user-mode 
software, and allows the user to start other programs, such as a Web browser, email
reader, or music player. These programs, too, make heavy use of the operating 
system.
The placement of the operating system is shown in Fig. 1-1. It runs on the
bare hardware and provides the base for all the other software.
An important distinction between the operating system and normal 
(usermode) software is that if a user does not like a particular email reader, she is free to
get a different one or write her own if she so chooses; she is typically not free to
write her own clock interrupt handler, which is part of the operating system and is
