842
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
Activity manager in system_server process
Camera app process
Granted URIs
Task: Pictures
SEND
content://pics/1
Saved state
STOPPED
RESUMED
ActivityRecord
(ComposeActivity)
ActivityRecord
(CameraActivity)
To: ComposeActivity
URI: content://pics/1
Allow
Check
PicturesProvider
Authority: "pics"
ComposeActivity
Email app process
Open
content://pics/1
Receive
data
Figure 10-69. Sharing a picture using a content provider.
This approach is extremely powerful, since it allows the system to maintain
tight control over per-application data, granting specific access to data where 
needed, without the user needing to be aware that this is happening. Many other user
interactions can also benefit from it. An obvious one is drag and drop to create a
similar URI grant, but Android also takes advantage of other information such as
current window focus to determine the kinds of interactions applications can have.
A final common security method Android uses is explicit user interfaces for
allowing/removing specific types of access. In this approach, there is some way an
application indicates it can optionally provide some functionally, and a 
system-supplied trusted user interface that provides control over this access.
A typical example of this approach is Android’s input-method architecture.
An input method is a specific service supplied by a third-party application that
allows the user to provide input to applications, typically in the form of an 
onscreen keyboard. This is a highly sensitive interaction in the system, since a lot of
personal data will go through the input-method application, including passwords
the user types.
An application indicates it can be an input method by declaring a service in its
manifest with an intent filter matching the action for the system’s input-method
protocol. This does not, however, automatically allow it to become an input 
method, and unless something else happens the application’s sandbox has no ability to
operate like one.
