454
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
Now consider a minor variation of the situation of Fig. 6-10. Suppose that
process 3 needs a camera as well as the two tape drives and the plotter. None of
the requests can be satisfied, so the entire system will eventually be deadlocked.
Even if we give process 3 its two tape drives and one plotter, the system deadlocks
when it requests the camera.
Now that we know how to detect deadlocks (at least with static resource
requests known in advance), the question of when to look for them comes up. One
possibility is to check every time a resource request is made. This is certain to
detect them as early as possible, but it is potentially expensive in terms of CPU
time. An alternative strategy is to check every k minutes, or perhaps only when the
CPU utilization has dropped below some threshold. The reason for considering the
CPU utilization is that if enough processes are deadlocked, there will be few 
runnable processes, and the CPU will often be idle.
6.4.3 Recovery from Deadlock
Suppose that our deadlock detection algorithm has succeeded and detected a
deadlock. What next? Some way is needed to recover and get the system going
again. In this section, we will discuss various ways of recovering from deadlock.
None of them are especially attractive, howev er.
Recovery through Preemption
In some cases, it may be possible to temporarily take a resource away from its
current owner and give it to another process. In many cases, manual intervention
may be required, especially in batch-processing operating systems running on
mainframes.
For example, to take a  laser printer away from its owner, the operator can 
collect all the sheets already printed and put them in a pile. Then the process can be
suspended (marked as not runnable). At this point, the printer can be assigned to
another process. When that process finishes, the pile of printed sheets can be put
back in the printer’s output tray and the original process restarted.
The ability to take a  resource away from a process, have another process use it,
and then give it back without the process noticing it is highly dependent on the
nature of the resource. Recovering this way is frequently difficult or impossible.
Choosing the process to suspend depends largely on which ones have resources
that can easily be taken back.
Recovery through Rollback
If the system designers and machine operators know that deadlocks are likely,
they can arrange to have processes checkpointed periodically. Checkpointing a
process means that its state is written to a file so that it can be restarted later. The
