522
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
x86
ESX hypervisor
VMM
VMM
VMM
VMM
VM
ESX
VM
VM
VM
Figure 7-12. ESX Server: VMware’s type 1 hypervisor.
ESX Server (unlike VMware Workstation) required users to install a new system
image on a boot partition.
Despite the drawbacks, the trade-off made sense for dedicated deployments of
virtualization in data centers, consisting of hundreds or thousands of physical 
servers, and often (many) thousands of virtual machines. Such deployments are
sometimes referred today as private clouds. There, the ESX Server architecture
provides substantial benefits in terms of performance, scalability, manageability,
and features. For example:
1. The CPU scheduler ensures that each virtual machine gets a fair share
of the CPU (to avoid starvation). It is also designed so that the 
different virtual CPUs of a given multiprocessor virtual machine are
scheduled at the same time.
2. The memory manager is optimized for scalability, in particular to run
virtual machines efficiently even when they need more memory than
is actually available on the computer. To achieve this result, ESX 
Server first introduced the notion of ballooning and transparent page
sharing for virtual machines (Waldspurger, 2002).
3. The I/O subsystem is optimized for performance. Although VMware
Workstation and ESX Server often share the same front-end 
emulation components, the back ends are totally different. In the VMware
Workstation case, all I/O flows through the host operating system and
its API, which often adds overhead. This is particularly true in the
case of networking and storage devices. With ESX Server, these 
device drivers run directly within the ESX hypervisor, without requiring
a world switch.
4. The back ends also typically relied on abstractions provided by the
host operating system. For example, VMware Workstation stores 
virtual machine images as regular (but very large) files on the host file
system. In contrast, ESX Server has VMFS (Vaghani, 2010), a file
