SEC. 11.3
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
897
of magnitude, leaving other virtual processors running in the partition spinning for
very long periods of time. To solve this problem, a guest operating system is
enlightened to spin only a short time before calling into the hypervisor to yield its
physical processor to run another virtual processor.
While the main job of the hypervisor is to run guest operating systems, it also
helps improve the security of Windows by exposing a secure execution 
environment called VSM (Virtual Secure Mode) in which a security-focused micro-OS
called the SK (Secure Kernel) runs. The Secure Kernel provides a set of security
services to Windows, collectively termed VBS (Virtualization-Based Security).
These services help protect code flow and integrity of OS components and 
maintain consistency of sensitive OS data structures as well as processor registers. In
Sec. 11.10 we will discuss the inner workings of Hyper-V virtualization stack and
learn how Virtualization-based Security works.
The Hardware Abstraction Layer
One goal of Windows is to make the system portable across hardware 
platforms. Ideally, to bring up an operating system on a new type of computer system,
it should be possible to just recompile the operating system on the new platform.
Unfortunately, it is not this simple. While many of the components in some layers
of the operating system can be largely portable (because they mostly deal with
internal data structures and abstractions that support the programming model),
other layers must deal with device registers, interrupts, DMA, and other hardware
features that differ significantly from machine to machine.
Most of the source code for the NTOS kernel is written in C rather than 
assembly language (only 2% is assembly on x86, and less than 1% on x64). However, all
this C code cannot just be scooped up from an x86 system, plopped down on, say,
an ARM system, recompiled, and rebooted owing to the many hardware 
differences between processor architectures that have nothing to do with the different
instruction sets and which cannot be hidden by the compiler. Languages like C
make it difficult to abstract away some hardware data structures and parameters,
such as the format of page table entries and the physical memory page sizes and
word length, without severe performance penalties. All of these, as well as a slew
of hardware-specific optimizations, would have to be manually ported even though
they are not written in assembly code.
Hardware details about how memory is organized on large servers, or what
hardware synchronization primitives are available, can also have a big impact on
higher levels of the system. For example, NT’s virtual memory manager and the
kernel layer are aware of hardware details related to cache and memory locality.
Throughout the system, NT uses compare&swap synchronization primitives, and it
would be difficult to port to a system that does not have them. Finally, there are
many dependencies in the system on the ordering of bytes within words. On all the
systems NT has ever been ported to, the hardware was set to little-endian mode.
