422
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
Power management brings up a number of questions that the operating system
has to deal with. Many of them relate to resource hibernation—selectively and
temporarily turning off devices, or at least reducing their power consumption when
they are idle. Questions that must be answered include these: Which devices can be
controlled? Are they on/off, or are there intermediate states? How much power is
saved in the low-power states? Is energy expended to restart the device? Must
some context be saved when going to a low-power state? How long does it take to
go back to full power? Of course, the answers to these questions vary from device
to device, so the operating system must be able to deal with a range of possibilities.
Various researchers have examined notebook computers to see where the 
power goes. The top three energy sinks are the display, the hard disk (if present), and
CPU, in that order. In other words, these components are obvious targets for saving
energy. On devices like smartphones, there may be other power drains, like the
radio and GPS. Although we focus on displays, disks, CPUs, and memory in this
section, the principles are the same for other peripherals.
5.8.2 Operating System Issues
The operating system plays a key role in energy management. It controls all
the devices, so it must decide what to shut down and when to shut it down. If it
shuts down a device and that device is needed again quickly, there may be an
annoying delay while it is restarted. On the other hand, if it waits too long to shut
down a device, energy is wasted for nothing.
The trick is to find algorithms and heuristics that let the operating system make
good decisions about what to shut down and when. The trouble is that ‘‘good’’ is
highly subjective. One user may find it acceptable that after 30 seconds of not
using the computer it takes 2 seconds for it to respond to a keystroke. Another user
may swear like a sailor under the same conditions. In the absence of audio input,
the computer cannot tell these users apart.
The Display
Let us now look at the big spenders of the energy budget to see what can be
done about each one. One of the biggest items in everyone’s energy budget is the
display. To get a bright sharp image, the screen must be backlit and that takes 
substantial energy. Many operating systems attempt to save energy here by shutting
down the display when there has been no activity for some number of minutes.
Often the user can decide what the shutdown interval is, thus pushing the trade-off
between frequent blanking of the screen and draining the battery quickly back to
the user (who probably really does not want it). Turning off the display is a sleep
state because it can be regenerated (from the video RAM) almost instantaneously
when any key is struck or the pointing device is moved.
