SEC. 2.5
SCHEDULING
153
Many of the same issues that apply to process scheduling also apply to thread
scheduling, although some are different. When the kernel manages threads, 
scheduling is usually done per thread, with little or no regard to which process the thread
belongs. Initially we will focus on scheduling issues that apply to both processes
and threads. Later on we will explicitly look at thread scheduling and some of the
unique issues it raises. We will deal with multicore chips in Chap. 8.
2.5.1 Introduction to Scheduling
Back in the old days of batch systems with input in the form of card images on
a magnetic tape, the scheduling algorithm was simple: just run the next job on the
tape. With multiprogramming, the scheduling algorithm became more complex
because there were usually multiple users waiting for service. Some mainframes
still combine batch and timesharing service, requiring the scheduler to decide
whether a batch job or an interactive user at a terminal should go next. (As an
aside, a batch job may be a request to run multiple programs in succession, but for
this section, we will just assume it is a request to run a single program.) Because
CPU time is a scarce resource on these machines, a good scheduler can make a big
difference in perceived performance and user satisfaction. Consequently, a lot of
work has gone into devising clever and efficient scheduling algorithms.
With the advent of personal computers, the situation changed in two ways.
First, most of the time there is only one active process. A user entering a document
on a word processor is unlikely to be simultaneously compiling a program in the
background. When the user types a command to the word processor, the scheduler
does not have to do much work to figure out which process to run—the word 
processor is the only candidate.
Second, computers have become so much faster over the years that the CPU is
rarely a scarce resource any more. Most programs for personal computers are 
limited by the rate at which the user can present input (by typing or clicking), not by
the rate the CPU can process it. Even compilations, a major sink of CPU cycles in
the past, take just a few seconds in most cases nowadays. Even when two programs
are actually running at once, such as a word processor and a spreadsheet, it hardly
matters which goes first since the user is probably waiting for both of them to 
finish (except that they generally complete their tasks so quickly that the user will not
be doing much waiting much anyway). As a consequence, scheduling does not
matter much on simple PCs. Of course, there are applications that practically eat
the CPU alive. For instance, rendering one hour of high-resolution video while
tweaking the colors in each of the 107,892 frames (in NTSC) or 90,000 frames (in
PAL) requires serious computing power. Howev er, similar applications are the
exception rather than the rule.
When we turn to networked servers, the situation changes appreciably. Here
multiple processes often do compete for the CPU, so scheduling matters again. For
example, when the CPU has to choose between running a process that gathers the
