SEC. 3.3
VIRTUAL MEMORY
193
memory, the hardware performs the necessary mapping on the fly. When the 
program references a part of its address space that is not in physical memory, the 
operating system is alerted to go get the missing piece and re-execute the instruction
that failed.
In a sense, virtual memory is a generalization of the base-and-limit-register
idea. The 8088 had separate base registers (but no limit registers) for text and data.
With virtual memory, instead of having separate relocation for just the text and
data segments, the entire address space can be mapped onto physical memory in
fairly small units. Different implementations of virtual memory make different
choices with respect to these units. Nowadays most systems use a technique called
paging where the units are fixed-size units of, say, 4 KB. In contrast, an alternative
solution known as segmentation uses entire variable-size segments as units. We
will look at both solutions, but focus on paging, as segmentation is not really used
these days anymore.
Virtual memory works just fine in a multiprogramming system, with bits and
pieces of many programs in memory at once. While a program is waiting for
pieces of itself to be read in, the CPU can be given to another process.
3.3.1 Paging
Most virtual memory systems use a technique called paging, which we will
now describe. On any computer, programs reference a set of memory addresses.
When a program executes an instruction like
MOV REG,1000
it does so to copy the contents of memory address 1000 to REG (assuming the first
operand represents the destination and the second the source). Addresses can be
generated using indexing, base registers, and various other ways.
These program-generated addresses are called virtual addresses and form the
virtual address space. On computers without virtual memory, the virtual address
is put directly onto the memory bus and causes the physical memory word with the
same address to be read or written. When virtual memory is used, the virtual 
addresses do not go directly to the memory bus. Instead, they go to an MMU 
(Memory Management Unit) that maps the virtual addresses onto the physical memory
addresses, as illustrated in Fig. 3-8.
A very simple example of how this mapping works is shown in Fig. 3-9. In
this example, we have a computer that generates 16-bit addresses, from 0 up to
64K < 1. These are the virtual addresses. This computer, howev er, has only 32 KB
of physical memory. So although 64-KB programs can be written, they cannot be
loaded into memory in their entirety and run. A complete copy of a program’s core
image, up to 64 KB, must be present on the disk or SSD, however, so that pieces
can be brought in dynamically as needed.
