SEC. 7.5
ARE HYPERVISORS MICROKERNELS DONE RIGHT?
493
Hardware
VMIL/HWinterface lib.
Sensitive
instruction
executed by
HW
VMI Linux
Hardware
VMware
VMI Linux
VMIL to Vmware lib.
Hypervisor call
Hardware
Xen
VMI Linux
VMIL to Xen library
Hypervisor call
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7-6. VMI Linux running on (a) the bare hardware, (b) VMware, and
(c) Xen.
a hypervisor-agnostic interface for Linux. The interface, included in the mainline
kernel from version 2.6.23 onward, allows the kernel to talk to whatever hypervisor
is managing the physical hardware.
7.6 MEMORY VIRTUALIZATION
So far we have addressed the issue of how to virtualize the CPU. But a 
computer system has more than just a CPU. It also has memory and I/O devices. They
have to be virtualized, too. Let us see how that is done.
Modern operating systems nearly all support virtual memory, which is 
basically a mapping of pages in the virtual address space onto pages of physical memory.
This mapping is defined by (multilevel) page tables. Typically the mapping is set
in motion by having the operating system set a control register in the CPU that
points to the top-level page table. Virtualization greatly complicates memory 
management. In fact, it took hardware manufacturers two tries to get it right.
Suppose, for example, a virtual machine is running, and the guest operating
system in it decides to map its virtual pages 7, 4, and 3 onto physical pages 10, 11,
and 12, respectively. It builds page tables containing this mapping and loads a
hardware register to point to the top-level page table. This instruction is sensitive.
On a VT CPU, it will trap; with dynamic translation it will cause a call to a 
hypervisor procedure; on a paravirtualized operating system, it will generate a hypercall.
For simplicity, let us assume it traps into a type 1 hypervisor, but the problem is the
same in all three cases.
What does the hypervisor do now? One solution is to actually allocate 
physical pages 10, 11, and 12 to this virtual machine and set up the actual page tables to
map the virtual machine’s virtual pages 7, 4, and 3 to use them. So far, so good.
