SEC. 3.6
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
235
To see the nature of this problem at its worst, consider a CPU that has 
instructions with two addresses, such as the Motorola 680x0, widely used in embedded
systems. The instruction
MOV.L #6(A1),2(A0)
is 6 bytes, for example (see Fig. 3-27). In order to restart the instruction, the 
operating system must determine where the first byte of the instruction is. The value of
the program counter at the time of the trap depends on which operand faulted and
how the CPU’s microcode has been implemented.
MOVE
6
2
1000
1002
1004
Opcode
First operand
Second operand
16 Bits
MOVE.L #6(A1), 2(A0)
}
}
}
Figure 3-27. An instruction causing a page fault.
In Fig. 3-27, we have an instruction starting at address 1000 that makes three
memory references: the instruction word and two offsets for the operands. 
Depending on which of these three memory references caused the page fault, the program
counter might be 1000, 1002, or 1004 at the time of the fault. It is often impossible
for the operating system to determine unambiguously where the instruction began.
If the program counter is 1002 at the time of the fault, the operating system has no
way of telling whether the word in 1002 is a memory address associated with an
instruction at 1000 (e.g., the address of an operand) or an opcode.
Bad as this problem may be, it could have been worse. Some 680x0 addressing
modes use autoincrementing, which means that a side effect of executing the
instruction is to increment one (or more) registers. Instructions that use 
autoincrement mode can also fault. Depending on the details of the microcode, the 
increment may be done before the memory reference, in which case the operating 
system must decrement the register in software before restarting the instruction. Or,
the autoincrement may be done after the memory reference, in which case it will
not have been done at the time of the trap and must not be undone by the operating
system. Autodecrement mode also exists and causes a similar problem. The 
precise details of whether autoincrements and autodecrements have or hav e not been
done before the corresponding memory references may differ from instruction to
instruction and from CPU model to CPU model.
Fortunately, on some machines the CPU designers provide a solution, usually
in the form of a hidden internal register into which the program counter is copied
just before each instruction is executed. These machines may also have a second
register telling which registers have already been autoincremented or 
autodecremented, and by how much. Given this information, the operating system can
