46
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
1.5.5 Protection
Computers contain large amounts of information that users often want to 
protect and keep confidential. This information may include email, business plans, tax
returns, and much more. It is up to the operating system to manage the system
security so that files, for example, are accessible only to authorized users.
As a simple example, just to get an idea of how security can work, consider
UNIX. Files in UNIX are protected by assigning each one a 9-bit binary 
protection code. The protection code consists of three 3-bit fields, one for the owner, one
for other members of the owner’s group (users are divided into groups by the 
system administrator), and one for everyone else. Each field has a bit for read access,
a bit for write access, and a bit for execute access. These 3 bits are known as the
rwx bits. For example, the protection code rwxr-x--x means that the owner can
read, write, or execute the file, other group members can read or execute (but not
write) the file, and everyone else can execute (but not read or write) the file. For a
directory, x indicates search permission. A dash means that the corresponding 
permission is absent.
In addition to file protection, there are many other security issues. Protecting
the system from unwanted intruders, both human and nonhuman (e.g., viruses), is
one of them. We will look at various security issues in Chap. 9.
1.5.6 The Shell
The operating system is the code that carries out the system calls. Editors,
compilers, assemblers, linkers, utility programs, and command interpreters 
definitely are not part of the operating system, even though they are important and 
useful. At the risk of confusing things somewhat, in this section we will look briefly
at the UNIX command interpreter, the shell. Although it is not part of the 
operating system, it makes heavy use of many operating system features and thus serves
as a good example of how the system calls are used. It is also the main interface
between a user sitting at his terminal and the operating system, unless the user is
using a graphical user interface. Many shells exist, including sh, csh, ksh, bash, and
zsh. All of them support the functionality described below, which derives from the
original shell (sh).
When any user logs in, a shell is started up. The shell has the terminal as 
standard input and standard output. It starts out by typing the prompt, a character
such as a dollar sign, which tells the user that the shell is waiting to accept a 
command. If the user now types
date
for example, the shell creates a child process and runs the date program as the
child. While the child process is running, the shell waits for it to finish. When the
child finishes, the shell types the prompt again and tries to read the next input line.
