SEC. 2.2
THREADS
113
multiplexed on top of them. These user-level threads are created, destroyed, and
scheduled just like user-level threads in a process that runs on an operating system
without multithreading capability. In this model, each kernel-level thread has some
set of user-level threads that take turns using it.
2.2.7 Making Single-Threaded Code Multithreaded
Many existing programs were written for single-threaded processes. 
Converting these to multithreading is much trickier than it may at first appear. Below we
will examine just a few of the pitfalls.
As a start, the code of a thread normally consists of multiple procedures, just
like a process. These may have local variables, global variables, and parameters.
Local variables and parameters do not cause any trouble, but variables that are 
global to a thread but not global to the entire program are a problem. These are 
variables that are global in the sense that many procedures within the thread use them
(as they might use any global variable), but other threads should logically leave
them alone.
As an example, consider the errno variable maintained by UNIX. When a
process (or a thread) makes a system call that fails, the error code is put into errno.
In Fig. 2-17, thread 1 executes the system call access to find out if it has 
permission to access a certain file. The operating system returns the answer in the global
variable errno. After control has returned to thread 1, but before it has a chance to
read errno, the scheduler decides that thread 1 has had enough CPU time for the
moment and switches to thread 2. Thread 2 executes an open call that fails, which
causes errno to be overwritten and thread 1’s access code to be lost forever. When
thread 1 starts up later, it will read the wrong value and behave incorrectly.
Thread 1
Thread 2
Access (errno set)
Errno inspected
Open (errno overwritten)
Time
Figure 2-17. Conflicts between threads over the use of a global variable.
Various solutions to this problem are possible. One is to prohibit global 
variables altogether. Howev er worthy this ideal may be, it conflicts with much existing
