618
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
One of the worst offenders is Apple, which is actually one of the tech 
companies that takes security extremely seriously. Apple devices have a feature called
handoff, which allows you to start typing an email on a MacBook and then switch
over to an iPhone to finish it. Did any user demand this before it was available? We
doubt it. But Apple did it anyway, despite the large amount of potentially buggy
code it required to implement this. So the downside of this more-or-less useless
feature is thousands of lines of new code in the operating system, potentially with
usable exploits, which also affect users who are not even aware of this feature, let
alone who use it.
Here are two fairly simple examples. The first email systems sent messages as
ASCII text. They were simple and could be made fairly secure. Unless there are
really dumb bugs in the email program, there is little an incoming ASCII message
can do to damage a computer system (we will actually see some attacks that may
be possible later in this chapter). Then people got the idea to expand email to
include other types of documents, for example, Word files, which can contain 
programs in macros. Reading such a document means running somebody else’s 
program on your computer. No matter how much sandboxing is used, running a 
foreign program on your computer is inherently more dangerous than looking at
ASCII text. Did users demand the ability to change email from passive documents
to active programs? Probably not, but somebody thought it would be a nifty idea,
without worrying too much about the security implications.
The second example is the same thing for Web pages. When the Web consisted
of passive HTML pages, it did not pose a major security problem. Now that many
Web pages contain programs (such as JavaScript) that the user has to run to view
the content, one security leak after another pops up. As soon as one is fixed,
another takes its place. When the Web was entirely static, were users up in arms
demanding dynamic content? Not that the authors remember, but its introduction
brought with it a raft of security problems. It looks like the 
Vice-President-InCharge-of-Saying-No was asleep at the wheel.
Actually, there are some organizations that think good security is more 
important than nifty new features, the military being the prime example. In the following
sections we will look some of the issues involved, but they can be summarized in
one sentence. To build a secure system, have a security model at the core of the
operating system that is simple enough that the designers can actually understand
it, and resist all pressure to deviate from it in order to add new features.
9.2 CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES
Security is easier to achieve if there is a clear model of what is to be protected
and who is allowed to do what. Quite a bit of work has been done in this area, so
we can only scratch the surface in this brief treatment. We will focus on a few 
general models and the mechanisms for enforcing them.
