SEC. 2.5
SCHEDULING
169
Real-time scheduling algorithms can be static or dynamic. The former make
their scheduling decisions before the system starts running. The latter make their
scheduling decisions at run time, after execution has started. Static scheduling
works only when there is perfect information available in advance about the work
to be done and the deadlines that have to be met. Dynamic scheduling algorithms
do not have these restrictions.
2.5.5 Policy Versus Mechanism
Up until now, we hav e tacitly assumed that all the processes in the system 
belong to different users and are thus competing for the CPU. While this is often
true, sometimes it happens that one process has many children running under its
control. For example, a database-management-system process may have many
children. Each child might be working on a different request, or each might have
some specific function to perform (query parsing, disk access, etc.). It is entirely
possible that the main process has an excellent idea of which of its children are the
most important (or time critical) and which the least. Unfortunately, none of the
schedulers discussed earlier accept any input from user processes about scheduling
decisions. As a result, the scheduler rarely makes the best choice.
The solution to this problem is to separate the scheduling mechanism from
the scheduling policy, a long-established principle (Levin et al., 1975). What this
means is that the scheduling algorithm is parameterized in some way, but the
parameters can be filled in by user processes. Let us consider the database example
once again. Suppose that the kernel uses a priority-scheduling algorithm but 
provides a system call by which a process can set (and change) the priorities of its
children. In this way, the parent can control how its children are scheduled, even
though it itself does not do the scheduling. Here the mechanism is in the kernel but
policy is set by a user process. Policy-mechanism separation is a key idea.
2.5.6 Thread Scheduling
When several processes each have multiple threads, we have two lev els of 
parallelism present: processes and threads. Scheduling in such systems differs 
substantially depending on whether user-level threads or kernel-level threads (or both)
are supported.
Let us consider user-level threads first. Since the kernel is not aware of the
existence of threads, it operates as it always does, picking a process, say, A, and
giving A control for its quantum. The thread scheduler inside A decides which
thread to run, say A1. Since there are no clock interrupts to multiprogram threads,
this thread may continue running as long as it wants to. If it uses up the process’
entire quantum, the kernel will select another process to run.
