348
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
interrupts work as follows. When an I/O device has finished the work given to it, it
causes an interrupt (assuming that interrupts have been enabled by the operating
system), by asserting a signal on a bus line that it has been assigned. This signal is
detected by the interrupt controller chip on the motherboard, which then decides
what to do.
CPU
Interrupt!
controller
3. CPU acks!
    interrupt
2. Controller !
    issues!
    interrupt
1. Device is finished
Disk
Keyboard
Printer
Clock
Bus
12
6
9
3
4
8
5
7
1
11
2
10
Figure 5-5. How an interrupt happens. The connections between the devices and
the controller actually use interrupt lines on the bus rather than dedicated wires.
If no other interrupts are pending, the interrupt controller handles the interrupt
immediately. Howev er, if another interrupt is in progress, or another device has
made a simultaneous request on a higher-priority interrupt request line on the bus,
the device is just ignored for the moment. In this case, it continues to assert an
interrupt signal on the bus until it is serviced by the CPU.
To handle the interrupt, the controller puts a number on the address lines 
specifying which device wants attention and asserts a signal to interrupt the CPU.
The interrupt signal causes the CPU to stop what it is doing and start doing
something else. The number on the address lines is used as an index into a table
called the interrupt vector to fetch a new program counter. This program counter
points to the start of the corresponding interrupt-service procedure. Typically traps,
exceptions, and interrupts use the same mechanism from this point on, often 
sharing the same interrupt vector. The location of the interrupt vector can be hardwired
into the machine or it can be anywhere in memory, with a CPU register (loaded by
the operating system) pointing to its origin.
Shortly after it starts running, the interrupt-service procedure acknowledges
the interrupt by writing a certain value to one of the interrupt controller’s I/O ports.
This acknowledgement tells the controller that it is free to issue another interrupt.
By having the CPU delay this acknowledgement until it is ready to handle the next
interrupt, race conditions involving multiple (almost simultaneous) interrupts can
be avoided. As an aside, some (older) computers do not have a centralized 
interrupt controller, so each device controller requests its own interrupts.
The hardware always saves certain information before starting the service 
procedure. Which information is saved and where it is saved vary greatly from CPU to
