CHAP. 9  
PROBLEMS
699
16. Consider a secret-key cipher that has a 26 × 26 matrix with the columns headed by
ABC ... Z and the rows also named ABC ... Z. Plaintext is encrypted two characters at a
time. The first character is the column; the second is the row. The cell formed by the
intersection of the row and column contains two ciphertext characters. What constraint
must the matrix adhere to and how many keys are there?
17. Consider the following way to encrypt a file. The encryption algorithm uses two n-byte
arrays, A and B. The first n bytes are read from the file into A. Then A[0] is copied to
B[i], A[1] is copied to B[ j], A[2] is copied to B[k], etc. After all n bytes are copied to
the B array, that array is written to the output file and n more bytes are read into A.
This procedure continues until the entire file has been encrypted. Note that here
encryption is not being done by replacing characters with other ones, but by changing
their order. How many keys hav e to be tried to exhaustively search the key space?
Give an advantage of this scheme over a monoalphabetic substitution cipher.
18. Secret-key cryptography is more efficient than public-key cryptography, but requires
the sender and receiver to agree on a key in advance. Suppose that the sender and
receiver hav e never met, but there exists a trusted third party that shares a secret key
with the sender and also shares a (different) secret key with the receiver. How can the
sender and receiver establish a new shared secret key under these circumstances?
19. Give a simple example of a mathematical function that to a first approximation will do
as a one-way function.
20. Suppose that two strangers A and B want to communicate with each other using 
secretkey cryptography, but do not share a key. Suppose both of them trust a third party C
whose public key is well known. How can the two strangers establish a new shared
secret key under these circumstances?
21. Internet cafes are businesses where tourists away from home can rent a computer for
an hour or two to do business that needs a computer. Describe a way to produce signed
documents from one using a smart card (assume that all the computers are equipped
with smart-card readers). Is your scheme secure?
22. Not having the computer echo the password is safer than having it echo an asterisk for
each character typed, since the latter discloses the password length to anyone nearby
who can see the screen. Assuming that passwords consist of upper and lowercase 
letters and digits only, and that passwords must be a minimum of fiv e characters and a
maximum of eight characters, how much safer is not displaying anything?
23. After getting your degree, you apply for a job as director of a large university computer
center that has just put its ancient mainframe system out to pasture and switched over
to a large LAN server running UNIX. You get the job. Fifteen minutes after you start
work, your assistant bursts into your office screaming: ‘‘Some students have 
discovered the algorithm we use for encrypting passwords and posted it on the Internet.’’ What
should you do?
24. Suppose the password file of a system is available to a cracker. How much extra time
does the cracker need to crack all passwords if the system is using the 
Morris-Thompson protection scheme with n-bit salt versus if the system is not using this scheme?
