162
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
2.5.3 Scheduling in Interactive Systems
We will now look at some algorithms that can be used in interactive systems.
These are common on personal computers, servers, and other kinds of systems as
well.
Round-Robin Scheduling
One of the oldest, simplest, fairest, and most widely used algorithms is round
robin. Each process is assigned a time interval, called its quantum, during which
it is allowed to run. If the process is still running at the end of the quantum, the
CPU is preempted and given to another process. If the process has blocked or 
finished before the quantum has elapsed, the CPU switching is done when the process
blocks, of course. Round robin is easy to implement. All the scheduler needs to do
is maintain a list of runnable processes, as shown in Fig. 2-43(a). When the 
process uses up its quantum, it is put on the end of the list, as shown in Fig. 2-43(b).
(a)
Current!
process
Next!
process
B
F
D
G
A
(b)
Current!
process
F
D
G
A
B
Figure 2-43. Round-robin scheduling. (a) The list of runnable processes.
(b) The list of runnable processes after B uses up its quantum.
The only really interesting issue with round robin is the length of the quantum.
Switching from one process to another requires a certain amount of time for doing
the administration—saving and loading registers and memory maps, updating 
various tables and lists, flushing and reloading the memory cache, and so on. Suppose
that this context switch takes 1 msec, including switching memory maps, flushing
and reloading the cache, etc. Also suppose that the quantum is set at 4 msec. With
these parameters, after doing 4 msec of useful work, the CPU will have to spend
(i.e., waste) 1 msec on process switching. Thus, 20% of the CPU time will be
thrown away on administrative overhead. Clearly, this is too much.
To improve the CPU efficiency, we could set the quantum to, say, 100 msec.
Now the wasted time is only 1%. But consider what happens on a server system if
50 requests come in within a very short time interval and with widely varying CPU
requirements. Fifty processes will be put on the list of runnable processes. If the
CPU is idle, the first one will start immediately, the second one may not start until
100 msec later, and so on. The unlucky last one may have to wait 5 sec before 
getting a chance, assuming all the others use their full quanta. Most users will 
perceive a 5-sec response to a short command as sluggish. This situation is especially
