406
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
This modular design, consisting of several layers and multiple programs,
makes X highly portable and flexible. It has been ported to most versions of
UNIX, including Solaris, all variants of BSD, AIX, Linux, and so on, making it
possible for application developers to have a standard user interface for multiple
platforms. It has also been ported to other operating systems. In contrast, in 
Windows, the windowing and GUI systems are mixed together in the GDI and located
in the kernel, which makes them harder to maintain, and of, course, not portable.
Now let us take a brief look at X as viewed from the Xlib level. When an X
program starts, it opens a connection to one or more X servers—let us call them
workstations even though they might be collocated on the same machine as the X
program itself. X considers this connection to be reliable in the sense that lost and
duplicate messages are handled by the networking software and it does not have to
worry about communication errors. Usually, TCP/IP is used between the client and
server.
Four kinds of messages go over the connection:
1. Drawing commands from the program to the workstation.
2. Replies by the workstation to program queries.
3. Keyboard, mouse, and other event announcements.
4. Error messages.
Most drawing commands are sent from the program to the workstation as 
oneway messages. No reply is expected. The reason for this design is that when the
client and server processes are on different machines, it may take a substantial
period of time for the command to reach the server and be carried out. Blocking
the application program during this time would slow it down unnecessarily. On the
other hand, when the program needs information from the workstation, it simply
has to wait until the reply comes back.
Like Windows, X is highly event driven. Events flow from the workstation to
the program, usually in response to some human action such as keyboard strokes,
mouse movements, or a window being uncovered. Each event message is 32 bytes,
with the first byte giving the event type and the next 31 bytes providing additional
information. Several dozen kinds of events exist, but a program is sent only those
ev ents that it has said it is willing to handle. For example, if a program does not
want to hear about key releases, it is not sent any key-release events. As in 
Windows, events are queued, and programs read events from the input queue. However,
unlike Windows, the operating system never calls procedures within the 
application program on its own. It does not even know which procedure handles which
ev ent.
A key concept in X is the resource. A resource is a data structure that holds
certain information. Application programs create resources on workstations.
Resources can be shared among multiple processes on the workstation. Resources
