878
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
ev olution than with Windows Vista, resulting in Windows 8. Howev er, this time
Microsoft applied the lessons from Windows 7 to create a well-engineered, 
performant product with less bloat.
Windows 8 built on the modular OneCore operating system composition
approach to produce a small operating system core that could be extended onto 
different devices. The goal was for each of the operating systems for specific devices
to be built by extending this core with new user interfaces and features, yet provide
as common an experience for users as possible. This approach was successfully
applied to Windows Phone 8, which shares most of the core binaries with desktop
and server Windows. Support of phones and tablets by Windows required support
for the popular ARM architecture (arm32), as well as new Intel processors 
targeting those devices. What makes Windows 8 part of the Modern Windows era are the
fundamental changes in the programming models, as we will examine in the next
section.
Windows 8 was not received to universal acclaim. In particular, the lack of the
Start Button on the taskbar (and its associated menu) was viewed by many users as
a huge mistake. Others objected to using a tablet-like, touch-first interface on a
desktop machine with a large monitor and a mouse. Over the following two years,
Microsoft responded to this and other criticisms by releasing an update in 2013
called Windows 8.1 which itself was refreshed again in the spring of 2014. This
version made significant progress toward fixing these problems while at the same
time introducing a host of new features, such as better cloud integration, improved
functionality for apps bundled with Windows, and numerous performance 
improvements which actually lowered the minimum system requirements for 
Windows for the first time ever.
11.1.6 Windows 10
Windows 10 was the culmination of Microsoft’s multi-device OS vision which
started with Windows 8. It provided a single, unified operating system and 
application development platform for desktop/laptop computers, tablets, smartphones, 
allin-one devices, Xbox, Hololens, and the Surface Hub collaboration device. Apps
written for the new UWP (Universal Windows Platform) could target multiple
device families with the same underlying code and be distributed from the 
Windows Store. Up until that time, developer interest in Windows 8’s modern 
application platform was low and Microsoft wanted to shift developer mindshare from the
competing iOS and Android platforms to Windows.
Internally, teams working on Windows and Windows Phone were merged into
a single organization and produced a converged OS which unified the application
development platform under UWP. Windows Mobile 10 was the mobile edition of
Windows 10 targeted at smartphones and tablets, built out of a single code base.
OneCore-based OS composition allowed each Windows edition to share a common
core, but provided its own unique user-interface and features.
