796
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
existing smartphone with a QWERTY keyboard and screen without touch input.
The goal of this device was to get an initial product out as soon as possible, by
leveraging existing hardware. The second target device, code-named ‘‘Dream,’’
was designed specifically for Android, to run it as fully envisioned. It included a
large (for that time) touch screen, slide-out QWERTY keyboard, 3G radio (for 
faster Web browsing), accelerometer, GPS and compass (to support Google Maps),
etc.
As the software schedule came better into focus, it became clear that the two
hardware schedules did not make sense. By the time it was possible to release
Sooner, that hardware would be well out of date, and the effort put on Sooner was
pushing out the more important Dream device. To address this, it was decided to
drop Sooner as a target device (though development on that hardware continued for
some time until the newer hardware was ready) and focus entirely on Dream.
Android 1.0
The first public availability of the Android platform was a preview SDK
released in November 2007. This consisted of a hardware device emulator running
a full Android device system image and core applications, API documentation, and
a dev elopment environment. At this point, the core design and implementation
were in place, and in most ways closely resembled the modern Android system
architecture we will be discussing. The announcement included video demos of
the platform running on top of both the Sooner and Dream hardware.
Early development of Android had been done under a series of quarterly demo
milestones to drive and show continued process. The SDK release was the first
more formal release for the platform. It required taking all the pieces that had been
put together so far for application development, cleaning them up, documenting
them, and creating a cohesive dev elopment environment for third-party developers.
Development now proceeded along two tracks: taking in feedback about the
SDK to further refine and finalize APIs, and finishing and stabilizing the 
implementation needed to ship the Dream device. A number of public updates to the
SDK occurred during this time, culminating in a 0.9 release in August 2008 that
contained the nearly final APIs.
The platform itself had been going through rapid development, and in the
spring of 2008 the focus was shifting to stabilization so that Dream could ship.
Android at this point contained a large amount of code that had never been shipped
as a commercial product, all the way from parts of the C library, through the
Dalvik (and later ART) interpreter (which runs the apps), system services, and
applications.
Android also contained quite a few novel design ideas that had never been
done before, and it was not clear how they would pan out. This all needed to come
together as a stable product, and the team spent a few nail-biting months 
wondering if all of this stuff would actually come together and work as intended.
