SEC. 7.4
TECHNIQUES FOR EFFICIENT VIRTUALIZATION
489
kernel. Any access to the kernel memory leads to a trap. In principle, it is possible
to take the trap and emulate the appropriate actions, but doing so is expensive and
typically requires installing the appropriate trap handler in the host kernel. Another
(obvious) way to solve the two-kings problem is to reconfigure the system to
remove the host operating system and actually give the guest the entire address
space. However, doing so is clearly not possible from user space either.
Likewise, the hypervisor needs to handle the interrupts to do the right thing,
for instance when the disk sends an interrupt or a page fault occurs. Also, if the
hypervisor wants to use trap-and-emulate for privileged instructions, it needs to
receive the traps. Again, installing trap/interrupt handlers in the kernel is not 
possible for user processes.
Most modern type 2 hypervisors therefore have a kernel module operating in
ring 0 that allows them to manipulate the hardware with privileged instructions. Of
course, manipulating the hardware at the lowest level and giving the guest access
to the full address space is all well and good, but at some point the hypervisor
needs to clean it up and restore the original processor context. Suppose, for 
instance, that the guest is running when an interrupt arrives from an external device.
Since a type 2 hypervisor depends on the host’s device drivers to handle the 
interrupt, it needs to reconfigure the hardware completely to run the host operating 
system code. When the device driver runs, it finds everything just as it expected it to
be. The hypervisor behaves just like teenagers throwing a party while their parents
are away. It is okay to rearrange the furniture completely, as long as they put it
back exactly as they found it before the parents come home. Going from a 
hardware configuration for the host kernel to a configuration for the guest operating
system is known as a world switch. We will discuss it in detail when we discuss
VMware in Sec. 7.12.
It should now be clear why these hypervisors work, even on unvirtualizable
hardware: sensitive instructions in the guest kernel are replaced by calls to 
procedures that emulate these instructions. No sensitive instructions issued by the guest
operating system are ever executed directly by the true hardware. They are turned
into calls to the hypervisor, which then emulates them.
7.4.2 The Cost of Virtualization
One might naively expect that CPUs with VT would greatly outperform 
software techniques that resort to translation, but measurements showed a mixed 
picture (Adams and Agesen, 2006). It turns out that the trap-and-emulate approach
used by VT hardware generates a lot of traps, and traps are very expensive on 
modern hardware because they ruin CPU caches, TLBs, and branch prediction tables
internal to the CPU. In contrast, when sensitive instructions are replaced by calls
to hypervisor procedures within the executing process, none of this 
context-switching overhead is incurred. As Adams and Agesen show, depending on the 
workload, sometimes software would beat hardware. For this reason, some type 1 (and
