292
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
then marked as free, so that the log can use it for new data. In this manner, the
cleaner moves along the log, removing old segments from the back and putting any
live data into memory for rewriting in the next segment. Consequently, the disk is a
big circular buffer, with the writer thread adding new segments to the front and the
cleaner thread removing old ones from the back.
The bookkeeping here is nontrivial, since when a file block is written back to a
new segment, the i-node of the file (somewhere in the log) must be located,
updated, and put into memory to be written out in the next segment. The i-node
map must then be updated to point to the new copy. Nev ertheless, it is possible to
do the administration, and the performance results show that all this complexity is
worthwhile. Measurements given in the papers cited above show that LFS 
outperforms UNIX by an order of magnitude on small writes, while having a 
performance that is as good as or better than UNIX for reads and large writes.
4.3.6 Journaling File Systems
Log-structured file systems are an interesting idea in general and one of the
ideas inherent in them, robustness in the face of failure, can also be applied to more
conventional file systems. The basic idea here is to keep a log of what the file 
system is going to do before it does it, so that if the system crashes before it can do its
planned work, upon rebooting the system can look in the log to see what was going
on at the time of the crash and finish the job. Such file systems, called journaling
file systems, are very popular. Microsoft’s NTFS file system and the Linux ext4
and ReiserFS file systems all use journaling. MacOS offers journaling file systems
as an option. Journaling is the default and it is widely used. Below we will give a
brief introduction to this topic.
To see the nature of the problem, consider a simple garden-variety operation
that happens all the time: removing a file. This operation (in UNIX) requires three
steps:
1. Remove the file from its directory.
2. Release the i-node to the pool of free i-nodes.
3. Return all the disk blocks to the pool of free disk blocks.
In Windows, analogous steps are required. In the absence of system crashes, the
order in which these steps are taken does not matter; in the presence of crashes, it
does. Suppose that the first step is completed and then the system crashes. The 
inode and file blocks will not be accessible from any file, but will also not be 
available for reassignment; they are just off in limbo somewhere, decreasing the 
available resources. If the crash occurs after the second step, only the blocks are lost.
If the order of operations is changed and the i-node is released first, then after
rebooting, the i-node may be reassigned, but the old directory entry will continue
