SEC. 5.6
USER INTERFACES: KEYBOARD, MOUSE, & MONITOR
401
CTRL-\ is similar to DEL, except that it sends the SIGQUIT signal, which
forces a core dump if not caught or ignored. When either of these keys is struck,
the driver should echo a carriage return and line feed and discard all accumulated
input to allow for a fresh start. The default value for INTR is often CTRL-C instead
of DEL, since many programs use DEL interchangeably with the backspace for
editing.
Another special character is EOF (CTRL-D), which in UNIX causes any 
pending read requests for the terminal to be satisfied with whatever is available in the
buffer, even if the buffer is empty. Typing CTRL-D at the start of a line causes the
program to get a read of 0 bytes, which is conventionally interpreted as end-of-file
and causes most programs to act the same way as they would upon seeing 
end-offile on an input file.
Mouse Software
Most desktop PCs have a mouse, or sometimes a trackball, which is just a
mouse lying on its back. Notebooks usually have a trackpad, but some people use
a mouse with them instead. Whenever a mouse has moved a certain minimum 
distance in either direction or a button is pressed or released, a message is sent to the
computer. The minimum distance is about 0.1 mm (although it can be set in 
software). Some people call this unit a mickey. Mice (or occasionally, mouses) can
have one, two, or three buttons, depending on the designers’ estimate of the users’
intellectual ability to keep track of more than one button. Some mice have wheels
that can send additional data back to the computer. Wireless mice are the same as
wired mice except that instead of sending their data back to the computer over a
wire, they use low-power radios, for example, using the Bluetooth standard.
The message to the computer contains three items: 6x, 6y, buttons. The first
item is the change in x position since the last message. Then comes the change in
y position since the last message. Finally, the status of the buttons is included. The
format of the message depends on the system and the number of buttons the mouse
has. Usually, it takes 3 bytes. Most mice report back a maximum of 40 times/sec,
so the mouse may have moved multiple mickeys since the last report.
Note that the mouse indicates only changes in position, not absolute position
itself. If the mouse is picked up and put down gently, no messages will be sent.
Many GUIs distinguish between single clicks and double clicks of a mouse
button. If two clicks are close enough in space (mickeys) and also close enough in
time (milliseconds), a double click is signaled. The maximum for ‘‘close enough’’
is up to the software, with both parameters usually being user settable.
Trackpads
Notebook computers are generally equipped with a trackpad (also called a
touchpad), for moving the cursor around the screen. Trackpads commonly also
have buttons around the edge, which are used like mouse buttons. Some trackpads
