492
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
Unmodified Windows
Modified Linux
Trap due
to sensitive
instruction
Trap due
to hypervisor
call
Paravirtualization
True virtualization
Microkernel
Type 1 hypervisor
Hardware
Figure 7-5. True virtualization and paravirtualization.
hypercalls, as seems likely. Again, this subject is controversial, but it is 
increasingly clear that the program running in kernel mode on the bare hardware should be
small and reliable and consist of thousands, not millions, of lines of code.
Paravirtualizing the guest operating system raises a number of serious issues.
First, if the sensitive (i.e., kernel-mode) instructions are replaced with calls to the
hypervisor, how can the operating system run on the native hardware? After all,
the hardware does not understand these hypercalls. And second, what if there are
multiple hypervisors available in the marketplace, such as VMware, the open
source Xen originally from the University of Cambridge, and Microsoft’s Hyper-V,
all with somewhat different hypervisor APIs? How can the kernel be modified to
run on all of them?
Amsden et al. (2006) have proposed a solution. In their model, the kernel is
modified to call special procedures whenever it needs to do something sensitive.
Together these procedures, called the VMI (Virtual Machine Interface), form a
low-level layer that interfaces with the hardware or hypervisor. These procedures
are designed to be generic and not tied to any specific hardware platform or to any
particular hypervisor.
An example of this technique is given in Fig. 7-6 for a paravirtualized version
of Linux they call VMI Linux (VMIL). When VMI Linux runs on the bare 
hardware, it has to be linked with a library that issues the actual (sensitive) instruction
needed to do the work, as shown in Fig. 7-6(a). When running on a hypervisor, say
VMware or Xen, the guest operating system is linked with different libraries that
make the appropriate (and different) hypercalls to the underlying hypervisor. In
this way, the core of the operating system remains portable yet is hypervisor
friendly and still efficient.
Other proposals for a virtual machine interface have also been made. Another
popular one is called paravirt ops. The idea is conceptually similar to what we
described above, but different in the details. Essentially, a group of several Linux
vendors that included companies like IBM, VMware, Xen, and Red Hat advocated
