SEC. 8.1
MULTIPROCESSORS
553
threads that work together. For example, if the threads of a process communicate a
lot, it is useful to have them running at the same time. Scheduling multiple threads
at the same time across multiple CPUs is called space sharing.
The simplest space-sharing algorithm works like this. Assume that an entire
group of related threads is created at once. At the time it is created, the scheduler
checks to see if there are as many free CPUs as there are threads. If there are, each
thread is given its own dedicated (i.e., nonmultiprogrammed) CPU and they all
start. If there are not enough CPUs, none of the threads are started until enough
CPUs are available. Each thread holds onto its CPU until it terminates, at which
time the CPU is put back into the pool of available CPUs. If a thread blocks on
I/O, it continues to hold the CPU, which is simply idle until the thread wakes up.
When the next batch of threads appears, the same algorithm is applied.
At any instant of time, the set of CPUs is statically partitioned into some 
number of partitions, each one running the threads of one process. In Fig. 8-13, we
have partitions of sizes 4, 6, 8, and 12 CPUs, with 2 CPUs unassigned, for 
example. As time goes on, the number and size of the partitions will change as new
threads are created and old ones finish and terminate.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
4-CPU partition
12-CPU partition
Unassigned CPU
6-CPU partition  
8-CPU partition  
Figure 8-13. A set of 32 CPUs split into four partitions, with two CPUs
available.
Periodically, scheduling decisions have to be made. In uniprocessor systems,
shortest job first is a well-known algorithm for batch scheduling. The analogous
algorithm for a multiprocessor is to choose the process needing the smallest 
number of CPU cycles, that is, the thread whose CPU-count × run-time is the smallest
of the candidates. However, in practice, this information is rarely available, so the
algorithm is hard to carry out. In fact, studies have shown that, in practice, beating
first-come, first-served is hard to do (Krueger et al., 1994).
In this simple partitioning model, a thread just asks for some number of CPUs
and either gets them all or has to wait until they are available. A different approach
is for threads to actively manage the degree of parallelism. One method for 
managing the parallelism is to have a central server that keeps track of which threads are
running and want to run and what their minimum and maximum CPU requirements
are (Tucker and Gupta, 1989). Periodically, each application sends a query to the
