1016
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
Then the HCS (Host Compute Service) communicates to the GCS (Guest 
Compute Service) running in the Utility VM and requests the server silo to be started.
Since Hyper-V isolated containers run their own copy of the Windows kernel
in the Utility VM, even a hostile workload that manages to take advantage of a
flaw in the Windows kernel will not be able to attack the host. Administrators can
alternate between running a server container in either a process isolated or 
HyperV isolated scenario with one command line switch.
Hardware Isolated Processes
Windows 10 has also introduced support for running certain processes that
represent a high attack surface within Hardware Isolated Containers in some 
Windows editions. MDAG (Microsoft Defender Application Guard) supports 
running the Edge browser within a hardware isolated container. The Edge team has
worked very hard to protect users when navigating to a malicious website. 
However, Edge is also very large and complicated and so is the underlying OS. There will
always be latent bugs that bad actors can try to exploit. By running the Edge 
browser in a Utility VM-type environment, malicious activity can be limited to the 
container. And since the container’s side effects can be discarded after each run, it is
possible to provide a pristine environment for each launch.
Unlike server containers which are headless, users need to see the Edge 
browser. This is achieved by lev eraging a technology known as RAIL (Remote Apps
Integrated Locally). The RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) is used to remote the
window for a single application, in this case the Edge browser, to the host. The
effect is the user has the same experience as running Edge locally but with the
backend processing done in a container. Copy and paste functionality is limited
over RDP to avoid malicious attacks via the clipboard. Display performance is
quite good due to shared memory between the host and the guest for display 
purposes, and a virtual GPU can even be exposed to the guest so that the guest can
leverage the host GPU for rendering purposes.
In later versions of Windows 10, MDAG was extended to support running
Microsoft Office applications as well. For other applications not supported directly
by MDAG, there is a feature known as Windows Sandbox. Windows Sandbox
uses the same underlying technology as MDAG and Hyper-V isolated containers
but provides the user with a full desktop environment. The user can launch 
Windows Sandbox to run programs they are hesitant to run on the host.
MDAG and Windows Sandbox leverage the same OS instance installed on the
host and when the host OS is serviced so is the MDAG/Sandbox environment.
They also benefit from the same VA-backed VM optimizations listed above like
direct mapped memory and integrated scheduler reducing the cost of running these
relative to a classic VM.
VA-backed VMs are also used for running certain guest operating systems
other than Windows.
WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) and WSA
