SEC. 11.11
SECURITY IN WINDOWS
1029
corrupting function pointers. In particular, function pointers can only point to the
first instruction of a function, aligned at 16-bytes, rather than arbitrary ROP 
gadgets.
With Windows 10, it became possible to enable CFG in kernel-mode with
KCFG (Kernel CFG) even though it was only enabled with Virtualization-based
security. Unsurprisingly, KCFG leverages VSM to enable the Secure Kernel to
maintain the CFG bitmap and prevent anybody in VTL0 kernel-mode from 
modifying it. With Windows 11, Kernel CFG is enabled by default on all machines.
One weakness in CFG is that every indirect call target is treated the same; a
function pointer can call any indirectly callable function regardless of the number
or types of parameters. An improved version of CFG, called XFG (Extended
Flow Guard) was developed to address this shortcoming. Instead of a global 
bitmap, XFG relies on function signature hashes to ensure that a call site is 
compatible with the target of a function pointer. Each indirectly-callable function is 
preceded by a hash covering its complete type, including the number and types of its
parameters. Each call site knows the signature hash of the function it is intending
to call and validates whether the target of the function pointer is a match. As a
result, XFG is much more selective than CFG in its validation and does not leave
too many options to attackers. Even though the initial release of Windows 11 does
not include XFG, it is present in Windows Insider flights and is likely to ship in a
subsequent official release.
CFG and XFG only protect the forward edge of code flow by validating 
indirect calls. However, as we described earlier, many attacks corrupt stack return
addresses to hijack code flow when the victim function returns. Reliably 
defending against return address hijacking using a software-only mechanism turns out to
be very difficult. In fact, Microsoft internally implemented such a defense in 2017,
called RFG (Return Flow Guard). RFG used a software shadow stack into
which return addresses on the call stack were saved on function entry and validated
by the function epilogue. Even though an incredible amount of engineering effort
went into this project across the compiler, operating systems, and security teams,
the project was ultimately shelved because an internal security researcher 
identified an attack with a high success rate that corrupted the return address on the stack
before it was copied to the shadow stack. Such an attack was previously 
considered, but thought to be infeasible due to its low expected success rate. RFG also
relied on the shadow stack being hidden from software running in the process
(otherwise an attacker could just corrupt the shadow stack as well). Soon after
RFG was canceled, other security researchers identified reliable ways to locate
such frequently accessed data structures in the address space. These were some
very important takeaways from the project: security features that rely on hiding
things and probabilistic mechanisms do not tend to be durable.
A robust defense against return address hijacking had to wait until Intel’s CET
was released in late 2020. CET is a hardware implementation of shadow stacks
without any (known) race conditions and does not depend on keeping the shadow
