366
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
Buffering is also important on output. Consider, for example, how output is
done to the modem without buffering using the model of Fig. 5-15(b). The user
process executes a wr ite system call to output n characters. The system has two
choices at this point. It can block the user until all the characters have been 
written, but this could take a very long time over a slow telephone line. It could also
release the user immediately and do the I/O while the user computes some more,
but this leads to an even worse problem: how does the user process know that the
output has been completed and it can reuse the buffer? The system could generate
a signal or software interrupt, but that style of programming is difficult and prone
to race conditions. A much better solution is for the kernel to copy the data to a
kernel buffer, analogous to Fig. 5-15(c) (but the other way), and unblock the caller
immediately. Now it does not matter when the actual I/O has been completed. The
user is free to reuse the buffer the instant it is unblocked.
Buffering is a widely used technique, but it has a downside as well. If data get
buffered too many times, performance suffers. Consider, for example, the network
of Fig. 5-16. When a user performs a system call to write to the network, the 
kernel copies the packet to a kernel buffer to allow the user to proceed immediately
(step 1). At this point, the user program can reuse the buffer.
2
1
5
4
3
User process
Network
Network!
controller
User!
space
Kernel!
space
Figure 5-16. Networking may involve many copies of a packet.
When the driver is called, it copies the data to the controller for output (step 2).
The reason it does not output to the wire directly from kernel memory is that once
a packet transmission has been started, it must continue at a uniform speed. The
driver cannot guarantee that it can get to memory at a uniform speed because DMA
channels and other I/O devices may be stealing many cycles. Failing to get a word
transmitted on time would ruin the packet. By buffering the packet inside the 
controller, this problem is avoided.
After the packet has been copied to the controller’s internal buffer, it is copied
out onto the network (step 3). Bits arrive at the receiver shortly after being sent, so
