SEC. 10.4
MEMORY MANAGEMENT IN LINUX
749
The exact boundaries and layout of the memory zones are architecture dependent.
On x86 hardware, certain devices can perform DMA operations only in the first 16
MB of address space, hence ZONE DMA is in the range 0–16 MB. However, on
64-bit machines, there is additional support for those devices that can perform
32-bit DMA operations, and ZONE DMA32 marks this region. In addition, if the
hardware, like the older-generation i386, cannot directly map memory addresses
above 896 MB, ZONE HIGHMEM corresponds to anything above this mark.
ZONE NORMAL is anything in between them. Therefore, on 32-bit x86 platfor ms,
the first 896 MB of the Linux address space are directly mapped, whereas the 
remaining 128 MB of the kernel address space are used to access high memory 
resgions. On x86 64, ZONE HIGHMEM is not defined. The kernel maintains a zone
structure for each of the three zones, and can perform memory allocations for the
three zones separately.
Main memory in Linux consists of three parts. The first two parts, the kernel
and memory map, are pinned in memory (i.e., never paged out). The rest of 
memory is divided into page frames, each of which can contain a text, data, or stack
page, a page-table page, or be on the free list.
The kernel maintains a map of the main memory which contains all 
information about the use of the physical memory in the system, such as its zones, free
page frames, and so forth. The information, illustrated in Fig. 10-15, is organized
as follows.
First of all, Linux maintains an array of page descriptors, of type page, one
for each physical page frame in the system, called mem map. Each page 
descriptor contains a pointer to the address space that it belongs to, in case the page is not
free, a pair of pointers which allow it to form doubly linked lists with other
descriptors, for instance to keep together all free page frames, and a few other
fields. In Fig. 10-15, the page descriptor for page 150 contains a mapping to the
address space the page belongs to. Pages 70, 80, and 200 are free, and they are
linked together. The size of the page descriptor is 32 bytes, so the mem map 
consumes less than 1% of the physical memory (for a page frame of 4 KB).
Since the physical memory is divided into zones, for each zone Linux 
maintains a zone descriptor. The zone descriptor contains information about the 
memory utilization within each zone, such as the number of active or inactive pages, low
and high watermarks to be used by the page-replacement algorithm described later
in this chapter, as well as many other fields.
In addition, a zone descriptor contains an array of free areas. The ith element
in this array identifies the first page descriptor of the first block of 2i free pages.
Since there may be more than one blocks of 2i free pages, Linux uses the pair of
page-descriptor pointers in each page element to link these together. This 
information is used in the memory-allocation operations. In Fig. 10-15, free area[0],
which identifies all free areas of main memory consisting of only one page frame
(since 20 is one), points to page 70, the first of the three free areas. The other free
blocks of size one can be reached through the links in each of the page descriptors.
