634
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
galaxies combined, is estimated to be in the ballpark of 1078, only 10x bigger, so
1077 is a rather large number. Shorter keys may thwart amateurs, but certainly not
major governments.
Public-Key Cryptography
Secret-key systems are efficient because the amount of computation required
to encrypt or decrypt a message is manageable, but they hav e a big drawback: the
sender and receiver must both be in possession of the shared secret key. They may
ev en hav e to get together physically for one to give it to the other. To get around
this problem, public-key cryptography is used (Diffie and Hellman, 1976). This
system has the property that distinct keys are used for encryption and decryption
and that given a well-chosen encryption key, it is virtually impossible to discover
the corresponding decryption key. Under these circumstances, the encryption key
can be made public and only the private decryption key kept secret.
Just to give a feel for public-key cryptography, consider the following two
questions:
Question 1: How much is 314159265358979 × 314159265358979?
Question 2: What is the square root of 3912571506419387090594828508241?
Most sixth graders, if given a pencil, paper, and the promise of a really big ice
cream sundae for the correct answer, could answer question 1 in an hour or two.
Most adults given a pencil, paper, and the promise of a lifetime 50% tax cut could
not solve question 2 at all without using a calculator, computer, or other external
help. Although squaring and square rooting are inverse operations, they differ 
enormously in their computational complexity. This kind of asymmetry forms the basis
of public-key cryptography. Encryption makes use of the easy operation but
decryption without the key requires you to perform the hard operation.
As an example, a popular public-key system called RSA (named after the
designers, Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adelson) exploits the fact that 
multiplying really big numbers is much easier for a computer to do than factoring really
big numbers, especially when all arithmetic is done using modulo arithmetic and
all the numbers involved have hundreds of digits (Rivest et al., 1978).
The way public-key cryptography works is that everyone picks a (public key,
private key) pair and publishes the public key. The public key is the encryption
key; the private key is the decryption key. Usually, the key generation is 
automated, possibly with a user-selected password fed into the algorithm as a seed. To
send a secret message to a user, a correspondent encrypts the message with the
receiver’s public key. Since only the receiver has the private key, only the receiver
can decrypt the message.
Public-key cryptography is great because you can just publish your public key
and everyone can use it and be sure that you alone can read the message. In 
contrast, with secret-key cryptography you have to worry about getting the key to the
