SEC. 10.3
PROCESSES IN LINUX
735
In both cases, the new thread begins executing at function, which is called with
arg as its only parameter. Also in both cases, the new thread gets its own private
stack, with the stack pointer initialized to stack ptr.
The sharing flags parameter is a bitmap that allows a finer grain of sharing
than traditional UNIX systems. Each of the bits can be set independently of the
other ones, and each of them determines whether the new thread copies some data
structure or shares it with the calling thread. Figure 10-9 shows some of the items
that can be shared or copied according to bits in sharing flags.
Flag
Meaning when set
Meaning when cleared
CLONE VM 
Create a new thread 
Create a new process
CLONE FS 
Share umask, root, and wor king dirs 
Do not share them
CLONE FILES 
Share the file descriptors 
Copy the file descriptors
CLONE SIGHAND 
Share the signal handler table 
Copy the table
CLONE PARENT 
New thread has same parent as the caller
New thread’s parent is caller
Figure 10-9. Bits in the sharing flags bitmap.
The CLONE VM bit determines whether the virtual memory (i.e., address
space) is shared with the old threads or copied. If it is set, the new thread just
moves in with the existing ones, so the clone call effectively creates a new thread
in an existing process. If the bit is cleared, the new thread gets its own private
address space. Having its own address space means that the effect of its STORE
instructions is not visible to the existing threads. This behavior is similar to fork,
except as noted below. Creating a new address space is effectively the definition of
a new process.
The CLONE FS bit controls sharing of the root and working directories and of
the umask flag. Even if the new thread has its own address space, if this bit is set,
the old and new threads share working directories. This means that a call to chdir
by one thread changes the working directory of the other thread, even though the
other thread may have its own address space. In UNIX, a call to chdir by a thread
always changes the working directory for other threads in its process, but never for
threads in another process. Thus this bit enables a kind of sharing not possible in
traditional UNIX versions.
The CLONE FILES bit is analogous to the CLONE FS bit. If set, the new
thread shares its file descriptors with the old ones, so calls to lseek by one thread
are visible to the other ones, again as normally holds for threads within the same
process but not for threads in different processes. Similarly, CLONE SIGHAND
enables or disables the sharing of the signal handler table between the old and new
threads. If the table is shared, even among threads in different address spaces, then
changing a handler in one thread affects the handlers in the others.
Finally, every process has a parent. The CLONE PARENT bit controls who the
parent of the new thread is. It can either be the same as the calling thread (in
