420
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
the only software most people run on their PC is a Web browser, and maybe not
ev en that.
It is probably a fair conclusion to say that most users want high-performance
interactive computing but do not really want to administer a computer. This has led
researchers to reexamine timesharing using simple text terminals (now called thin
clients) that meet modern terminal expectations. X was a step in this direction and
dedicated X terminals were popular for a little while but they fell out of favor
because they cost as much as PCs, could do less, and still needed some software
maintenance. The holy grail would be a high-performance interactive computing
system in which the user machines had no software at all. Interestingly enough,
this goal is achievable, although existing solutions tend to be less extreme.
One of the best known thin clients is the ChromeBook. It is pushed actively
by Google, but with a wide variety of manufacturers providing a wide variety of
models. The notebook runs ChromeOS which is based on Linux and the Chrome
Web browser and was originally assumed to be online all the time. Most other 
software is hosted on the Web in the form of Web Apps, making the software stack on
the Chromebook itself considerably thinner than in most traditional notebooks. It
turns out that model did not work so well, so eventually Google made it possible to
run Android apps natively on Chromebooks. On the other hand, a system that runs
a full Linux stack, and a Chrome browser, is not exactly anorexic either.
5.8 POWER MANAGEMENT
The first general-purpose electronic computer, the ENIAC, had 18,000 vacuum
tubes and consumed 140,000 watts of power. As a result, it ran up a nontrivial
electricity bill. After the invention of the transistor, power usage dropped 
dramatically and the computer industry lost interest in power requirements. However, 
nowadays power management is back in the spotlight for several reasons, and the 
operating system is playing a role here.
Let us start with desktop PCs. A desktop PC often has a 200-watt power 
supply (which is typically 85% efficient, that is, loses 15% of the incoming energy to
heat). If 100 million of these machines are turned on at once worldwide, together
they use 20,000 megawatts of electricity. This is the total output of 20 
average-sized nuclear power plants. If power requirements could be cut in half, we
could get rid of 10 nuclear power plants. From an environmental point of view, 
getting rid of 10 nuclear power plants (or an equivalent number of fossil-fuel plants) is
a big win for the planet.
The other place where power is a very big issue is on battery-powered 
computers, including notebooks, smartphones, and tablets, among others. The heart of
the problem is that the batteries cannot hold enough charge to last very long, a few
hours at most. Furthermore, despite massive research efforts by battery companies,
computer companies, and consumer electronics companies, progress is glacial. To
