582
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
not one network, but a federation of thousands of separate networks. However, for
our purposes, it is sufficient to think of it as one WAN.
Ethernet
Classic Ethernet, which is described in IEEE Standard 802.3, consists of a
coaxial cable to which a number of computers are attached. The cable is called the
Ethernet, in reference to the luminiferous ether through which electromagnetic
radiation was once thought to propagate. (When the nineteenth-century British
physicist James Clerk Maxwell discovered that electromagnetic radiation could be
described by a wav e equation, scientists assumed that space must be filled with
some ethereal medium in which the radiation was propagating. Only after the
famous Michelson-Morley experiment in 1887, which failed to detect the ether, did
physicists realize that radiation could propagate in a vacuum.)
In the very first version of Ethernet, a computer was attached to the cable by
literally drilling a hole halfway through the cable and screwing in a wire leading to
the computer. This was called a vampire tap, and is illustrated symbolically in
Fig. 8-28(a). The taps were hard to get right, so before long, proper connectors
were used. Nevertheless, electrically, all the computers were connected as if the
cables on their network interface cards were soldered together.
Computer
Ethernet
Switch
Computer
Ethernet
(b)
(a)
Vampire tap
Figure 8-28. (a) Classic Ethernet. (b) Switched Ethernet.
With many computers hooked up to the same cable, a protocol is needed to
prevent chaos. To send a packet on an Ethernet, a computer first listens to the
cable to see if any other computer is currently transmitting. If not, it just begins
transmitting a packet, which consists of a short header followed by a payload of 0
to 1500 bytes. If the cable is in use, the computer simply waits until the current
transmission finishes, then it begins sending.
If two computers start transmitting simultaneously, a collision results, which
both of them detect. Both respond by terminating their transmissions, waiting a
random amount of time between 0 and T µsec and then starting again. If another
collision occurs, all colliding computers randomize the wait into the interval 0 to
