SEC. 1.6
SYSTEM CALLS
59
bytes—2 bytes for the i-number and 14 bytes for the name. Now a more 
complicated structure is needed to support long file names, but conceptually a directory is
still a set of (i-number, ASCII name) pairs. In Fig. 1-21, mail has i-number 16, and
so on. What link does is simply create a brand new directory entry with a (possibly
new) name, using the i-number of an existing file. In Fig. 1-21(b), two entries have
the same i-number (70) and thus refer to the same file. If either one is later
removed, using the unlink system call, the other one remains. If both are removed,
UNIX sees that no entries to the file exist (a field in the i-node keeps track of the
number of directory entries pointing to the file), so the file is removed from the
SSD or disk and its blocks are returned to the free block pool.
As we have mentioned earlier, the mount system call allows two file systems to
be merged into one. A common situation is to have the root file system, containing
the binary (executable) versions of the common commands and other heavily used
files, on an SSD / hard disk (sub)partition and user files on another (sub)partition.
Further, the user can then insert a USB disk with files to be read.
By executing the mount system call, the USB file system can be attached to the
root file system, as shown in Fig. 1-22. A typical statement in C to mount is
mount("/dev/sdb0", "/mnt", 0);
where the first parameter is the name of a block special file for USB drive 0, the
second parameter is the place in the tree where it is to be mounted, and the third
parameter tells whether the file system is to be mounted read-write or read-only.
(a)
(b)
bin
dev
lib
mnt
usr
bin
dev
usr
!lib
Figure 1-22. (a) File system before the mount. (b) File system after the mount.
After the mount call, a file on drive 0 can be accessed by just using its path
from the root directory or the working directory, without regard to which drive it is
on. In fact, second, third, and fourth drives can also be mounted anywhere in the
tree. The mount call makes it possible to integrate removable media into a single
integrated file hierarchy, without having to worry about which device a file is on.
Although this example involves USB drives, portions of hard disks (often called
partitions or minor devices) can also be mounted this way, as well as external
hard disks and SSDs. When a file system is no longer needed, it can be unmounted
with the umount system call. After that, it is no longer accessible. Of course, if it
is needed later on, it can be mounted again.
