12
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
thousands of bugs, which necessitated a continuous stream of new releases in an
attempt to correct them. Each new release fixed some bugs and introduced new
ones, so the number of bugs probably remained constant over time.
One of the designers of OS/360, Fred Brooks, subsequently wrote a 
now-classic, witty, and incisive book (Brooks, 1995) describing his experiences with
OS/360. While it would be impossible to summarize the book here, suffice it to
say that the cover shows a herd of prehistoric beasts stuck in a tar pit. The cover of
Silberschatz et al. (2012) makes a similar point about operating systems being
dinosaurs. He also made the comment that adding programmers to a late software
project makes it even later as well saying that it takes 9 months to produce a child,
no matter how many women you assign to the project.
Despite its enormous size and problems, OS/360 and the similar 
third-generation operating systems produced by other computer manufacturers actually 
satisfied most of their customers reasonably well. They also popularized several key
techniques absent in second-generation operating systems. Probably the most
important of these was multiprogramming. On the 7094, when the current job
paused to wait for a tape or other I/O operation to complete, the CPU simply sat
idle until the I/O finished. With heavily CPU-bound scientific calculations, I/O is
infrequent, so this wasted time is not significant. With commercial data processing,
the I/O wait time can often be 80% or 90% of the total time, so something had to
be done to avoid having the (expensive) CPU be idle so much.
The solution that evolved was to partition memory into several pieces, with a
different job in each partition, as shown in Fig. 1-5. While one job was waiting for
I/O to complete, another job could be using the CPU. If enough jobs could be held
in main memory at once, the CPU could be kept busy nearly 100% of the time.
Having multiple jobs safely in memory at once requires special hardware to protect
each job against snooping and mischief by the other ones, but the 360 and other
third-generation systems were equipped with this hardware.
Job 3
Job 2
Job 1
Operating
system
Memory
partitions
Figure 1-5. A multiprogramming system with three jobs in memory.
Another major feature present in third-generation operating systems was the
ability to read jobs from cards onto the disk as soon as they were brought to the
computer room. Then, whenever a running job finished, the operating system could
load a new job from the disk into the now-empty partition and run it. This ability is
