SEC. 5.6
USER INTERFACES: KEYBOARD, MOUSE, & MONITOR
413
Windows a program cannot assume that whatever it draws on the screen will stay
there until it removes it. Other windows can be dragged on top of this one, menus
can be pulled down over it, dialog boxes and tool tips can cover part of it, and so
on. When these items are removed, the window has to be redrawn. The way 
Windows tells a program to redraw a window is to send it a WM PA US message. As a
friendly gesture, it also provides information about what part of the window has
been overwritten, in case it is easier or faster to regenerate that part of the window
instead of redrawing the whole thing from scratch.
There are two ways Windows can get a program to do something. One way is
to post a message to its message queue. This method is used for keyboard input,
mouse input, and timers that have expired. The other way, sending a message to the
window, inv olves having Windows directly call WndProc itself. This method is
used for all other events. Since Windows is notified when a message is fully 
processed, it can refrain from making a new call until the previous one is finished. In
this way race conditions are avoided.
There are many more message types. To avoid erratic behavior should an
unexpected message arrive, the program should call DefWindowProc at the end of
WndProc to let the default handler take care of the other cases.
In summary, a Windows program normally creates one or more windows with
a class object for each one. Associated with each program is a message queue and
a set of handler procedures. Ultimately, the program’s behavior is driven by the
incoming events, which are processed by the handler procedures. This is a very 
different model of the world than the more procedural view that UNIX takes.
Drawing to the screen is handled by a package consisting of hundreds of 
procedures that are bundled together to form the GDI (Graphics Device Interface).
It can handle text and graphics and is designed to be platform and device 
independent. Before a program can draw (i.e., paint) in a window, it needs to acquire a 
device context, which is an internal data structure containing properties of the 
window, such as the font, text color, background color, and so on. Most GDI calls use
the device context, either for drawing or for getting or setting the properties.
Various ways exist to acquire the device context. A simple example of its
acquisition and use is
hdc = GetDC(hwnd);
Te xtOut(hdc, x, y, psText, iLength);
ReleaseDC(hwnd, hdc);
The first statement gets a handle to a device content, hdc. The second one uses the
device context to write a line of text on the screen, specifying the (x, y) coordinates
of where the string starts, a pointer to the string itself, and its length. The third call
releases the device context to indicate that the program is through drawing for the
moment. Note that hdc is used in a way analogous to a UNIX file descriptor. Also
note that ReleaseDC contains redundant information (the use of hdc uniquely
