647
fingerprints online, may be unacceptable to people because they associate 
fingerprints with criminals. Using fingerprints to unlock a phone is all right though.
9.5 EXPLOITING SOFTWARE
One of the main ways to break into a user’s computer is by exploiting 
vulnerabilities in the software running on the system to make it do something different
than the programmer intended. For instance, a common attack is to infect a user’s
browser by means of a drive-by-download. In this attack, the cybercriminal 
infects the user’s browser by placing malicious content on a Web server. As soon as
the user visits the Website, the browser is infected. Sometimes, the Web servers are
completely run by the attackers, in which case the attackers should find a way to
lure users to their Website (spamming people with promises of free software, 
movies, or naughty pictures might do the trick). However, it is also possible that 
attackers are able to put malicious content on a legitimate Website (perhaps in the ads, or
on a discussion board). Some years ago, the Website of the Miami Dolphins was
compromised in this way, just days before the Dolphins hosted the Super Bowl,
one of the most anticipated sporting events of the year. Just days before the event,
the Website was extremely popular and many users visiting the Website were 
infected. After the initial infection in a drive-by-download, the attacker’s code 
running in the browser downloads the real zombie software (malware), executes it,
and makes sure it is always started when the system boots.
Since this is a book on operating systems, the focus is on how to subvert the
operating system. The many ways one can exploit software bugs to attack Websites
and databases are not covered here. The typical scenario is that somebody 
discovers a bug in the operating system and then finds a way to exploit it to compromise
computers that are running the defective code. Drive-by-downloads are not really
part of the picture either, but we will see that many of the vulnerabilities and
exploits in user applications are applicable to the kernel also.
In Lewis Caroll’s famous book Through the Looking Glass, the Red Queen
takes Alice on a crazy run. They run as fast as they can, but no matter how fast they
run, they always stay in the same place. That is odd, thinks Alice, and she says so.
‘‘In our country you’d generally get to somewhere else—if you ran very fast for a
long time as we’ve been doing.’’ ‘‘A slow sort of country!’’ said the Queen. ‘‘Now,
here, you see, it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you
want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!’’
The Red Queen effect is typical for evolutionary arms races. In the course of
millions of years, the ancestors of zebras and lions both evolved. Zebras became
faster and better at seeing, hearing, and smelling predators—useful, if you want to
outrun the lions. But in the meantime, lions also became faster, bigger, stealthier,
and better camouflaged—useful, if you like zebra for dinner. So, although the lion
and the zebra both ‘‘improved’’ their designs, neither became more successful at
SEC. 9.4
AUTHENTICATION
