SEC. 1.3
COMPUTER HARDWARE REVIEW
29
arm position, each of the heads can read an annular region known as a track. 
Together, all the tracks for a given arm position form a cylinder.
Each track is divided into some number of sectors, typically 512 bytes per 
sector. On modern disks, the outer cylinders contain more sectors than the inner ones.
Moving the arm from one cylinder to the next takes about 1 msec. Moving it to a
random cylinder typically takes 5–10 msec, depending on the drive. Once the arm
is on the correct track, the drive must wait for the needed sector to rotate under the
head, an additional delay of 5–10 msec, depending on the drive’s RPM. Once the
sector is under the head, reading or writing occurs at a rate of 50 MB/sec on 
lowend disks to 160–200 MB/sec on faster ones.
Many people also refer to SSDs as disks, even though they are physically not
disks at all and do not have platters or moving arms. They store data in electronic
(Flash) memory. The only way in which they resemble disks in terms of hardware
is that they also store a lot of data which is not lost when the power is off. But from
the operating system’s point of view, they are somewhat disk-like. SSDs are much
more expensive than rotating disks in terms of cost per byte stored, which is why
they are not so much used in data centers for bulk storage. However, they are much
faster than magnetic disks and since they hav e no mechanical arm to move, they
are better at accessing data at random locations. Reading data from an SSD takes
tens of microseconds instead of milliseconds as with hard disks. Writes are more
complicated as they require a full data block to be erased first and take more time.
But even if a  write takes a few hundred microseconds, this is still better than a hard
disk’s performance.
The youngest and fastest member of the stable storage family is known as 
persistent memory. The best known example is Intel Optane which became available
in 2016. In many ways, persistent memory can be seen as an additional layer
between SSDs (or hard disks) and memory: it is both fast, only slightly slower than
regular RAM, and it holds its content across power cycles. While it can be used to
implement really fast SSDs, manufacturers may also attach it directly to the 
memory bus. In fact, it can be used like normal memory to store an application’s data
structures, except that the data will still be there when the power goes off. In that
case, accessing it requires no special driver and may happen at byte granularity,
obviating the need to transfer data in large blocks as in hard disks and SSDs.
1.3.4 I/O Devices
It should now be clear that CPU and memory are not the only resources that
the operating system must manage. There are many other ones. Besides disks
there many other I/O devices that interact heavily with the operating system. As
we saw in Fig. 1-6, I/O devices generally consist of two parts: a controller and the
device itself. The controller is a chip (or a set of chips) that physically controls the
device. It accepts commands from the operating system, for example, to read data
from the device, and carries them out.
