36
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
called PE (Portable Executable). As you can see, the BIOS under UEFI very
much looks like a little operating system itself which understands partitions, file
systems, executables, etc. It even has a shell with some standard commands.
The boot code still needs to pick one of the bootloader programs to load Linux
or Windows, or whatever operating system, but there may be many partitions with
operating systems and given so much choice, which one should it pick? This is
decided by the UEFI boot manager, which you can think of as a boot menu with
different entries and a configurable order in which to try the different boot options.
Changing the menu and the default bootloader is very easy and can be done from
within the currently executing operating system. As before, the bootloader will
continue loading the operating system of choice.
This is by no means the full story. UEFI is very flexible and highly 
standardized, and contains many advanced features. However, this is enough for now.
In Chap. 9, we will pick up UEFI again when we discuss an interesting feature
known as Secure Boot, which allows a user to be sure that the operating system is
booted as intended and with the correct software.
1.4 THE OPERATING SYSTEM ZOO
Operating systems have been around now for over half a century. During this
time, quite a variety of them have been developed, not all of them widely known.
In this section, we will briefly touch upon nine of them. We will come back to
some of these different kinds of systems later in the book.
1.4.1 Mainframe Operating Systems
At the high end are the operating systems for mainframes, those room-sized
computers still found in major corporate data centers. These computers differ from
personal computers in terms of their I/O capacity. A mainframe with 1000 hard
disks and many terabytes of data are not unusual; a personal computer with these
specifications would be the envy of its friends. Mainframes are also making 
something of a comeback as high-end servers for large-scale electronic commerce sites,
banking, airline reservations, and servers for business-to-business transactions.
The operating systems for mainframes are heavily oriented toward processing
many jobs at once, most of which need prodigious amounts of I/O. They typically
offer three kinds of services: batch, transaction processing, and timesharing. A
batch system is one that processes routine jobs without any interactive user present.
Claims processing in an insurance company or sales reporting for a chain of stores
is typically done in batch mode. Transaction-processing systems handle large 
numbers of small requests, for example, check processing at a bank or airline 
reservations. Each unit of work is small, but the system must handle hundreds or 
thousands per second. Timesharing systems allow multiple remote users to run jobs on
the computer at once, such as querying a big database. These functions are closely
