60
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
1.6.4 Miscellaneous System Calls
A variety of other system calls exist as well. We will look at just four of them
here. The chdir call changes the current working directory. After the call
chdir("/usr/ast/test");
an open on the file xyz will open /usr/ast/test/xyz. The concept of a working 
directory eliminates the need for typing (long) absolute path names all the time.
In UNIX every file has a mode used for protection. The mode includes the
read-write-execute bits for the owner, group, and others. The chmod system call
makes it possible to change the mode of a file. For example, to make a file 
readonly by everyone except the owner, one could execute
chmod("file", 0644);
The kill system call is the way users and user processes send signals. If a 
process is prepared to catch a particular signal, then when it arrives, a signal handler is
run. If the process is not prepared to handle a signal, then its arrival kills the 
process (hence the name of the call).
POSIX defines a number of procedures for dealing with time. For example,
time just returns the current time in seconds, with 0 corresponding to Jan. 1, 1970
at midnight (just as the day was starting, not ending). On computers using 32-bit
words, the maximum value time can return is 232 < 1 seconds (assuming an 
unsigned integer is used). This value corresponds to a little over 136 years. Thus in
the year 2106, 32-bit UNIX systems will go berserk, not unlike the famous Y2K
problem that would have wreaked havoc with the world’s computers in 2000, were
it not for the massive effort the IT industry put into fixing the problem. If you 
currently have a 32-bit UNIX system, you are advised to trade it in for a 64-bit one
sometime before the year 2106.
1.6.5 The Windows API
So far we have focused primarily on UNIX. Now it is time to look briefly at
Windows. Windows and UNIX differ in a fundamental way in their respective 
programming models. A UNIX program consists of code that does something or
other, making system calls to have certain services performed. In contrast, a 
Windows program is normally event driven. The main program waits for some event to
happen, then calls a procedure to handle it. Typical events are keys being struck,
the mouse being moved, a mouse button being pushed, or a USB drive inserted or
removed from the computer. Handlers are then called to process the event, update
the screen, and update the internal program state. All in all, this leads to a 
somewhat different style of programming than with UNIX, but since the focus of this
book is on operating system function and structure, these different programming
models will not concern us much more.
