SEC. 3.1
NO MEMORY ABSTRACTION
181
(a)
(b)
(c)
0xFFF …
0
0
0
User!
program
User!
program
User!
program
Operating!
system in!
RAM
Operating!
system in!
RAM
Operating!
system in!
ROM
Device!
drivers in ROM
Figure 3-1. Three simple ways of organizing memory with an operating system
and one user process. Other possibilities also exist.
One way to get some parallelism in a system with no memory abstraction is to
program with multiple threads. Since all threads in a process are supposed to see
the same memory image, the fact that they are forced to is not a problem. While
this idea works, it is of limited use since what people often want is unrelated 
programs to be running at the same time, something the threads abstraction does not
provide. Furthermore, any system that is so primitive as to provide no memory
abstraction is unlikely to provide a threads abstraction.
3.1.1 Running Multiple Programs Without a Memory Abstraction
However, even with no memory abstraction, it is possible to run multiple 
programs at the same time. What the operating system has to do is save the entire 
contents of memory to a file on nonvolatile storage, then bring in and run the next 
program. As long as there is only one program at a time in memory, there are no 
conflicts. This concept (swapping) will be discussed below.
With the addition of some special hardware, it is possible to run multiple 
programs concurrently, even without swapping. The early models of the IBM 360
solved the problem as follows. Memory was divided into 2-KB blocks and each
was assigned a 4-bit protection key held in special registers inside the CPU. A
machine with a 1-MB memory needed only 512 of these 4-bit registers for a total
of 256 bytes of key storage. The PSW (Program Status Word) also contained a
4-bit key. The 360 hardware trapped any attempt by a running process to access
memory with a protection code different from the PSW key. Since only the 
operating system could change the protection keys, user processes were prevented from
interfering with one another and with the operating system itself.
Nevertheless, this solution had a major drawback, depicted in Fig. 3-2. Here
we have two programs, each 16 KB in size, as shown in Fig. 3-2(a) and (b). The
former is shaded to indicate that it has a different memory key than the latter. The
