SEC. 9.6
EXPLOITING HARDWARE
675
Of course, the CPU has to be careful with such out-of-order execution. If
something goes wrong during the execution of the DIV, for instance if the divisor
turns out to be 0, it must raise an exception and undo all the effects of the 
subsequent out-of-order instructions. In other words, it must make it so that it appears as
if the out-of-order instructions were never executed. These instructions are 
transient.
The problem is that such transient execution is squashed only at the 
architectural level—the level that is visible to the program(mers). So, the CPU makes sure
that the transient instructions will have had no effect on registers or memory. 
Howev er, there may still be traces of the executed-and-then-squashed code at the 
microarchitectural level. The micro-architecture is what implements a particular 
instruction set architecture. It includes the sizes and replacement policies of the caches,
the TLB, the execution units, etc. For example, many CPUs from different 
companies implement the x86-64 instruction set architecture and they can all run the
same programs, but under the hood, at the micro-architectural level, these CPUs
are very different. Transient execution that is squashed at the architectural level
may leave traces at the micro-architectural level, for instance because data that was
loaded from memory is now in the cache.
How bad is that, you ask? Well, as we saw in the previous section, the presence
or absence or data in the cache may be used as a covert channel. And that is 
exactly what is happening in these attacks.
Transient Execution Attacks Based on Faults
For eff iciency, operating systems such as Linux map the operating system 
kernel into the address space of every user process. Doing so makes system calls
cheaper, because even though the system call causes a switch to a more privileged
domain, the kernel, there is no need to change the page tables. To make sure that
user processes cannot modify kernel pages, the pages table entries for kernel 
memory have the Supervisor bit set (see Fig. 3.11).
Now consider the code in Fig. 9-27, where an unprivileged attacker tries to
read a kernel address in Line 2. The CPU will not be enthusiastic about the idea,
because the supervisor bit is set for that page, so the instruction will fault and
throw an exception. This will happen when the corresponding instruction is retired.
In the meantime, however, the CPU will continue under the assumption that all is
well. It will (transiently) read the value and (transiently) execute the instruction in
Line 3, which uses it as an index in an array. When the exception is finally raised,
the architectural effects of the instructions are reverted. For instance, when the dust
settles, the original values will be in reg0 and reg1. The problem is that the 
transient instruction in Line 3 still had an effect on the micro-architectural state, as
array [reg0 * 4096] is now in the cache. See also Fig. 9-28. Before executing
these three instructions, the attacker makes sure that none of the other elements are
in the cache. This is easy: just access a lot of other data, so that all the cachelines
