SEC. 5.8
POWER MANAGEMENT
427
Thermal Management
A somewhat different, but still energy-related issue, is thermal management.
Modern CPUs get extremely hot due to their high speed. Desktop machines 
normally have an internal electric fan to blow the hot air out of the chassis. Since
reducing power management is usually not a driving issue with desktop machines,
the fan is usually on all the time.
With notebooks, the situation is different. The operating system has to monitor
the temperature continuously. When it gets close to the maximum allowable 
temperature, the operating system has a choice. It can switch on the fan, which makes
noise and consumes power. Alternatively, it can reduce power consumption by
reducing the backlighting of the screen, slowing down the CPU, being more
aggressive about spinning down the disk, and so on.
Some input from the user may be valuable as a guide. For example, a user
could specify in advance that the noise of the fan is objectionable, so the operating
system would reduce power consumption instead.
Battery Management
In ye olde days, a battery just provided current until it was fully drained, at
which time it stopped. Not any more. Mobile devices now use smart batteries now,
which can communicate with the operating system. Upon request from the 
operating system, they can report on things like their maximum voltage, current voltage,
maximum charge, current charge, maximum drain rate, current drain rate, and
more. Most mobile devices have programs that can be run to query and display all
these parameters. Smart batteries can also be instructed to change various 
operational parameters under control of the operating system.
Some notebooks have multiple batteries. When the operating system detects
that one battery is about to go, it has to arrange for a graceful cutover to the next
one, without causing any glitches during the transition. When the final battery is on
its last legs, it is up to the operating system to warn the user and then cause an
orderly shutdown, for example, making sure that the file system is not corrupted.
Driver Interface
Several operating systems have an elaborate mechanism for doing power 
management called ACPI (Advanced Configuration and Power Interface). The
operating system can send any conformant driver commands asking it to report on
the capabilities of its devices and their current states. This feature is especially
important when combined with plug and play because just after it is booted, the
operating system does not even know what devices are present, let alone their
properties with respect to energy consumption or power manageability.
