680
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
There have been recorded cases in which a virus planted a logic bomb on the
computers it infected. Generally, these were programmed to go off all at once at
some date and time in the future. However, since the programmer has no idea in
advance of which computers will be hit, logic bombs planted by viruses cannot be
used for job protection or blackmail. Often they are set to go off on a date that has
some political significance. Sometimes these are called time bombs.
9.7.2 Back Doors
Another security hole caused by an insider is the back door. This problem is
created by code inserted into the system by a system programmer to bypass some
normal check. For example, a programmer could add code to the login program to
allow anyone to log in using the login name ‘‘zzzzz’’ no matter what was in the
password file. The normal code in the login program might look something like
Fig. 9-31(a). The back door would be the change to Fig. 9-31(b).
while (TRUE) {
while (TRUE) {
pr intf("login: "); 
printf("login: ");
get str ing(name);
get str ing(name);
disable echoing( );
disable echoing( );
pr intf("password: ");
pr intf("password: ");
get str ing(password); 
get str ing(password);
enable echoing( );
enable echoing( );
v = check validity(name, password); 
v = check validity(name, password);
if (v) break;
if (v || strcmp(name, "zzzzz") == 0) break;
}
}
execute shell(name); 
execute shell(name);
(a) 
(b)
Figure 9-31. (a) Normal code. (b) Code with a back door inserted.
What the call to strcmp does is check if the login name is ‘‘zzzzz’’. If so, the
login succeeds, no matter what password is typed. If this back-door code were
inserted by a programmer working for a computer manufacturer and then shipped
with its computers, the programmer could log into any computer made by his 
company, no matter who owned it or what was in the password file. The same holds for
a programmer working for the OS vendor. The back door simply bypasses the
whole authentication process.
One way for companies to prevent backdoors is to have code reviews as 
standard practice. With this technique, once a programmer has finished writing and
testing a module, the module is checked into a code database. Periodically, all the
programmers in a team get together and each one gets up in front of the group to
explain what his code does, line by line. Not only does this greatly increase the
chance that someone will catch a back door, but it raises the stakes for the 
programmer, since being caught red-handed is probably not a plus for his career. If
