1032
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
Mitigation 
VBS-only
Description
InitAll 
No
Zero-initializes stack var iables to avoid vulnerabilities
/GS 
No
Add canary to stack frames to protect return addresses
DEP 
No
Data Execution Prevention. Stacks and heaps are not executable
ASLR/KASLR 
No
Randomize user/ker nel address space to make ROP attacks difficult
CFG 
No
Control Flow Guard. Protect integrity of forward-edge control flow
KCFG 
Yes 
Ker nel-mode CFG. Secure Ker nel maintains CFG bitmap
XFG 
No
Extended Flow Guard. Much finer grained protection than CFG
CET 
No
Strong defense against ROP attacks using shadow stacks
KCET 
Yes 
Ker nel-mode CET. Secure Ker nel maintains shadow stacks.
PA C
No 
Protects stack retur n addresses using signatures
CIG 
No
Enforces that code binaries are properly signed
ACG
No
User-mode enforcement for WˆX and that data cannot become code
HVCI 
Yes 
Ker nel-mode enforcement for WˆX and that data cannot become code
PatchGuard 
No
Detect attempts to modify ker nel code and data
HyperGuard 
Yes 
Stronger protection than PatchGuard
Windows Defender 
No
Built-in antimalware software
Figure 11-58. Some of the principal security protections in Windows.
Limiting Window of Time to Exploit
The most direct way to limit exploitation of a security bug is to fix or mitigate
the issue and to deploy broadly as quickly as possible. Windows Update is an
automated service providing fixes to security vulnerabilities by patching the
affected programs and libraries within Windows. Many of the vulnerabilities fixed
were reported by security researchers, and their contributions are acknowledged in
the notes attached to each fix. Ironically the security updates themselves pose a
significant risk. Many vulnerabilities used by attackers are exploited only after a
fix has been published by Microsoft. This is because reverse engineering the fixes
themselves is the primary way most hackers discover vulnerabilities in systems.
Systems that did not have all known updates immediately applied are thus 
susceptible to attack. The security research community is usually insistent that companies
patch all vulnerabilities found within a reasonable time. The current monthly patch
frequency used by Microsoft is a compromise between keeping the community
happy and how often users must deal with patching to keep their systems safe.
A significant cause of delay in fixing security issues is the need for a reboot
after the updated binaries are deployed to customer machines. Reboots are very 
inconvenient when many applications are open and the user is in the middle of work.
The situation is similar on server machines where any downtime may result in
Websites, file servers, database becoming inaccessible. In cloud datacenters, host
