SEC. 9.6
EXPLOITING HARDWARE
671
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
Server
Server locks
file to send 1
Time
Collaborator
Server unlocks
file to send 0
Bit stream sent
Figure 9-24. A covert channel using file locking.
reliable, even in a busy system, and can proceed as fast as the two processes can
get scheduled. To get higher bandwidth, why not use two files per bit time, or
make it a byte-wide channel with eight signaling files, S0 through S7?
Acquiring and releasing dedicated resources (tape drives, plotters, etc.) can
also be used for signaling. The server acquires the resource to send a 1 and releases
it to send a 0. In UNIX, the server could create a file to indicate a 1 and remove it
to indicate a 0; the collaborator could use the access system call to see if the file
exists. This call works even though the collaborator has no permission to use the
file. Unfortunately, many other covert channels exist.
Lampson also mentioned a way of leaking information to the (human) owner
of the server process. Presumably the server process will be entitled to tell its
owner how much work it did on behalf of the client, so the client can be billed. If
the actual computing bill is, say, $100 and the client’s income is $53,000, the 
server could report the bill as $100.53 to its owner.
Just finding all the covert channels, let alone blocking them, is nearly hopeless.
Introducing a process that causes page faults at random or otherwise spends its
time degrading system performance in order to reduce the bandwidth of the covert
channels is not an attractive idea.
In the next section, we introduce a particularly insidious covert channel, based
on hardware properties. In some ways, it is worse than the ones above, because it
can also be used to steal sensitive information—a trick known as a side channel.
9.6.2 Side Channels
So far, we hav e assumed that two parties, a sender and a receiver, use a covert
channel to transmit sensitive information, deliberately. Howev er, sometimes, we
can use similar techniques to leak information from a victim process without the
victim’s knowledge. In this case, we speak of side channels. Often a channel can
function as a covert channel or as a side channel, depending on how it is used.
