SEC. 7.11
CASE STUDY: VMWARE
509
7.11.2 VMware Workstation
VMware Workstation was the first virtualization product for 32-bit x86 
computers. The subsequent adoption of virtualization had a profound impact on the
industry and on the computer science community: in 2009, the ACM awarded its
authors the ACM Software System Award for VMware Workstation 1.0 for
Linux. The original VMware Workstation is described in a detailed technical 
article (Bugnion et al., 2012). Here we provide a summary of that paper.
The idea was that a virtualization layer could be useful on commodity 
platforms built from x86 CPUs and primarily running the Microsoft Windows 
operating systems (a.k.a. the WinTel platform). The benefits of virtualization could help
address some of the known limitations of the WinTel platform, such as application
interoperability, operating system migration, reliability, and security. In addition,
virtualization could easily enable the coexistence of operating system alternatives,
in particular, Linux.
Although there existed decades’ worth of research and commercial 
development of virtualization technology on mainframes, the x86 computing environment
was sufficiently different that new approaches were necessary. For example, 
mainframes were vertically integrated, meaning that a single vendor engineered the
hardware, the hypervisor, the operating systems, and most of the applications.
In contrast, the x86 industry was (and still is) disaggregated into at least four
different categories: (a) Intel and AMD make the processors; (b) Microsoft offers
Windows and the open source community offers Linux; (c) a third group of 
companies builds the I/O devices and peripherals and their corresponding device 
drivers; and (d) a fourth group of system integrators such as HP and Dell put together
computer systems for retail sale. For the x86 platform, virtualization would first
need to be inserted without the support of any of these industry players.
Because this disaggregation was a fact of life, VMware Workstation differed
from classic virtual machine monitors that were designed as part of single-vendor
architectures with explicit support for virtualization. Instead, VMware Workstation
was designed for the x86 architecture and the industry built around it. VMware
Workstation addressed these new challenges by combining well-known 
virtualiza4G tion techniques, techniques from other domains, and new techniques into a
single solution.
We now discuss the specific technical challenges in building VMware 
Workstation.
7.11.3 Challenges in Bringing Virtualization to the x86
Recall our definition of hypervisors and virtual machines: hypervisors apply
the well-known principle of adding a level of indirection to the domain of 
computer hardware. They provide the abstraction of virtual machines: multiple copies
of the raw underlying hardware, each running an independent operating system
