SEC. 11.3
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
907
loaded and linked by the kernel on Windows, including network protocol stacks
and file systems.
Recent versions of Windows have a lot more support for running device drivers
in user mode, and this is the preferred model for new device drivers. There are 
hundreds of thousands of different device drivers for Windows working with more
than a million distinct devices. This represents a lot of code to get correct. It is
much better if bugs cause a device to become inaccessible by crashing in a 
usermode process rather than causing the system to crash. Bugs in kernel-mode device
drivers are the major source of the dreaded BSOD (Blue Screen Of Death) where
Windows detects a fatal error within kernel mode and shuts down or reboots the
system. BSOD’s are comparable to kernel panics on UNIX systems.
Since device drivers make up something in the vicinity of 70% of the code in
the kernel, the more drivers that can be moved into user-mode processes, where a
bug will only trigger the failure of a single driver (rather than bringing down the
entire system), the better. The trend of moving code from the kernel to user-mode
processes for improved system reliability has been accelerating in recent years.
The I/O manager also includes the plug-and-play and device 
power-management facilities. Plug-and-play comes into action when new devices are 
detected on the system. The plug-and-play subcomponent is first notified. It works with a
service, the user-mode plug-and-play manager, to find the appropriate device driver
and load it into the system. Getting the right one is not always easy and sometimes
depends on sophisticated matching of the specific hardware device version to a
particular version of the drivers. Sometimes a single device supports a standard
interface which is supported by multiple different drivers, written by different 
companies.
We will study I/O further in Sec. 11.7 and the most important NT file system,
NTFS, in Sec. 11.8.
Device power management reduces power consumption when possible,
extending battery life on notebooks, and saving energy on desktops and servers.
Getting power management correct can be challenging as there are many subtle
dependencies between devices and the buses that connect them to the CPU and
memory. Power consumption is not affected just by what devices are powered-on,
but also by the clock rate of the CPU, which is also controlled by the device power
manager. We will take a more in-depth look at power management in Sec. 11.9.
The process manager manages the creation and termination of processes and
threads, including establishing the policies and parameters which govern them. But
the operational aspects of threads are determined by the kernel layer, which 
controls scheduling and synchronization of threads, as well as their interaction with
the control objects, like APCs. Processes contain threads, an address space, and a
handle table containing the handles the process can use to refer to kernel-mode
objects. Processes also include information needed by the scheduler for switching
between address spaces and managing process-specific hardware information (like
segment descriptors). We will study process and thread management in Sec. 11.4.
