444
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
observation is true, and in nearly all applications trying again later is not a 
problem. For example, in the popular Ethernet local area network, if two computers
send a packet at the same time, each one waits a random time and tries again; in
practice this solution works fine. However, in a few applications one would prefer
a solution that always works and cannot fail due to an unlikely series of random
numbers. Think about safety control in a nuclear power plant.
One improvement to Fig. 6-4 that has no deadlock and no starvation is to 
protect the fiv e statements following the call to think by a binary semaphore. Before
starting to acquire forks, a philosopher would do a down on mutex. After replacing
the forks, she would do an up on mutex. From a theoretical viewpoint, this 
solution is adequate. From a practical one, it has a performance bug: only one 
philosopher can be eating at any instant. With fiv e forks available, we should be able to
allow two philosophers to eat at the same time.
The solution presented in Fig. 6-5 is deadlock-free and allows the maximum
parallelism for an arbitrary number of philosophers. It uses an array, state, to keep
track of whether a philosopher is currently eating, thinking, or hungry (trying to
acquire forks). A philosopher may move into eating state only if neither neighbor
is eating. Philosopher i’s neighbors are defined by the macros LEFT and RIGHT.
In other words, if i is 2, LEFT is 1 and RIGHT is 3.
The program uses an array of semaphores, one per philosopher, so hungry 
philosophers can block if the needed forks are busy. Note that each process runs the
procedure philosopher as its main code, but the other procedures, take forks,
put forks, and test, are ordinary procedures and not separate processes.
While we may consider the dining philosophers a contrived example, mostly
popular with university professors and few others, deadlocks are quite real and
may occur easily. A lot of research has gone into ways to deal with them. This
chapter discusses the deadlock and starvation problems in detail, as well as what
can be done about them.
6.2 INTRODUCTION TO DEADLOCKS
Deadlock can be defined formally as follows:
A set of processes is deadlocked if each process in the set is waiting for an
event that only another process in the set can cause.
Because all the processes are waiting, none of them will ever cause any event that
could wake up any of the other members of the set, and all the processes continue
to wait forever. For this model, we assume that processes are single threaded and
that no interrupts are possible to wake up a blocked process. The no-interrupts
condition is needed to prevent an otherwise deadlocked process from being 
awakened by an alarm, and then causing events that release other processes in the set.
