616
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
with physical access to the machine (including the cleaning staff, secretary, and all
visitors) also has access to everything on the machine and also on all other
machines to which that one has automatic access.
Another trick to infect somebody’s computer is to offer free, but malicious 
versions of popular software that users install themselves: Trojans. Unfortunately,
there are many other examples, and they include high-ranking officials losing USB
sticks with sensitive information, old hard drives with trade secrets that are not
properly wiped before being dropped in the recycling bin, and so on. None of these
are terribly sophisticated.
Nevertheless, some of the most important security incidents are due to 
sophisticated cyber attacks. In this book, we are specifically interested in attacks that are
related to the operating system. In other words, we will not look at Web attacks, or
attacks on SQL databases. Instead, we focus on attacks where the operating system
is either the target of the attack or plays an important role in enforcing (or more
commonly, failing to enforce) the security policies. If you are interested in 
network security, there are many books on the topic, including Kaufman et al. (2022),
Moseley (2021), Santos (2022), Schoenfield (2021), and Van Oorschot (2020).
In general, we distinguish between attacks that passively try to steal 
information and attacks that actively try to make a computer program misbehave. An
example of a passive attack is an adversary that sniffs the network traffic and tries
to break the encryption (if any) to get to the data. In an active attack, the intruder
may take control of a user’s Web browser to make it execute malicious code, for
instance to steal credit card details. In the same vein, we distinguish between 
cryptography, which is all about shuffling a message or file in such a way that it
becomes hard to recover the original data unless you have the key, and software
hardening, which adds protection mechanisms to programs to make it hard for
attackers to make them misbehave. The operating system uses cryptography in
many places: to transmit data securely over the network, to store files securely on
disk, to scramble the passwords in a password file, etc. Program hardening is also
used all over the place: to prevent attackers from injecting new code into running
software, to make sure that each process has exactly those privileges it needs to do
what it is supposed to do and no more, etc.
When the computer is under control of the attacker, it is known as a bot or
zombie. Typically, none of this is visible to the user. The attacker can use the bot
to launch new attacks, steal passwords or credit card details, encrypt all the data on
the disk for ransom, mine cryptocurrency, or any of the 1001 other things you can
do with someone else’s computer and electricity someone else is paying for.
Sometimes, the effects of the attack go well beyond the computer systems
themselves and reach directly into the physical world. One example is the attack on
the waste management system of Maroochy Shire, in Queensland, Australia—not
too far from Brisbane. A disgruntled ex-employee of a sewage system installation
company was not amused when the Maroochy Shire Council turned down his job
application and he decided not to get mad, but to get even. He took control of the
