SEC. 10.5
INPUT/OUTPUT IN LINUX
761
When the connection is no longer needed, it can be closed in the usual way, via the
close system call.
10.5.3 Input/Output System Calls in Linux
Each I/O device in a Linux system generally has a special file associated with
it. Most I/O can be done by just using the proper file, eliminating the need for 
special system calls. Nevertheless, sometimes there is a need for something that is 
device specific. Prior to POSIX, most UNIX systems had a system call ioctl that 
performed a large number of device-specific actions on special files. Over the course
of the years, it had gotten to be quite a mess. POSIX cleaned it up by splitting its
functions into separate function calls primarily for terminal devices. In Linux and
modern UNIX systems, whether each one is a separate system call or they share a
single system call or something else is implementation dependent.
The first four calls listed in Fig. 10-20 are used to set and get the terminal
speed. Different calls are provided for input and output because some modems
operate at split speed. For example, old videotex systems allowed people to access
public databases with short requests from the home to the server at 75 bits/sec with
replies coming back at 1200 bits/sec. This standard was adopted at a time when
1200 bits/sec both ways was too expensive for home use. Times change in the 
networking world. This asymmetry still persists, with some telephone companies
offering inbound service at 40 Mbps and outbound service at 10 Mbps, or some
other asymmetric arrangement.
With fiber optics, the inbound and outbound
speeds are generally the same, for example, 500/500.
Function call
Description
s = cfsetospeed(&ter mios, speed) 
Set the output speed
s = cfsetispeed(&ter mios, speed) 
Set the input speed
s = cfgetospeed(&ter mios, speed) 
Get the output speed
s = cfgtetispeed(&ter mios, speed) 
Get the input speed
s = tcsetattr(fd, opt, &termios) 
Set the attributes
s = tcgetattr(fd, &termios) 
Get the attributes
Figure 10-20. The main POSIX calls for managing the terminal.
The last two calls in the list are for setting and reading back all the special
characters used for erasing characters and lines, interrupting processes, and so on.
In addition, they enable and disable echoing, handle flow control, and perform 
similar functions. Additional I/O function calls also exist, but they are somewhat 
specialized, so we will not discuss them further. In addition, ioctl is still available.
