SEC. 7.13
SUMMARY
525
PROBLEMS
1. Give a reason why a data center might be interested in virtualization.
2. Give a reason why a company might be interested in running a hypervisor on a
machine that has been in use for a while.
3. Give a reason why a software developer might use virtualization on a desktop machine
being used for development.
4. Give a reason why an individual at home might be interested in virtualization. Which
type of hypervisor would probably be best for a home user?
5. Why do you think virtualization took so long to become popular? After all, the key
paper was written in 1974 and IBM mainframes had the necessary hardware and 
software throughout the 1970s and beyond.
6. What are the three main requirements for designing hypervisors?
7. Name two kinds of instructions that are sensitive in the Popek and Goldberg sense.
8. Name three machine instructions that are not sensitive in the Popek and Goldberg
sense.
9. What is the difference between full virtualization and paravirtualization? Which do
you think is harder to do? Explain your answer.
10. Does it make sense to paravirtualize an operating system if the source code is 
available? What if it is not?
11. Consider a type 1 hypervisor that can support up to n virtual machines at the same
time. PCs can have a maximum of four disk primary partitions. Can n be larger than 4?
If so, where can the data be stored?
12. Briefly explain the concept of process-level virtualization.
13. Why do type 2 hypervisors exist? After all, there is nothing they can do that type 1
hypervisors cannot do and the type 1 hypervisors are generally more efficient as well.
14. Is virtualization of any use to type 2 hypervisors?
15. Why was binary translation invented? Do you think it has much of a future? Explain
your answer.
16. Explain how the x86’s four protection rings can be used to support virtualization.
17. State one reason as to why a hardware-based approach using VT-enabled CPUs can
perform poorly when compared to translation-based software approaches.
18. Give one case where a translated code can be faster than the original code, in a system
using binary translation.
19. VMware does binary translation one basic block at a time, then it executes the block
and starts translating the next one. Could it translate the entire program in advance and
then execute it? If so, what are the advantages and disadvantages of each technique?
20. What is the difference between a pure hypervisor and a pure microkernel?
