SEC. 5.8
POWER MANAGEMENT
423
The Hard Disk
Another major villain is the hard disk, assuming your machine has one. It
takes substantial energy to keep it spinning at high speed, even if there are no
accesses. Many computers, especially notebooks, spin the disk down after a certain
number of minutes of being idle. When it is next needed, it is spun up again.
Unfortunately, a stopped disk is hibernating rather than sleeping because it takes
quite a few seconds to spin it up again, which causes noticeable delays for the user.
In addition, restarting the disk consumes considerable energy. As a 
consequence, every disk has a characteristic time, Td, that is its break-even point, often
in the range 5 to 15 sec. Suppose that the next disk access is expected to come
some time t in the future. If t < Td, it takes less energy to keep the disk spinning
rather than spin it down and then spin it up so quickly. If t > Td, the energy saved
makes it worth spinning the disk down and then up again much later. If a good
prediction could be made (e.g., based on past access patterns), the operating 
system could make good shutdown predictions and save energy. In practice, most 
systems are conservative and stop the disk only after a few minutes of inactivity.
Another way to save disk energy is to have a substantial disk cache in RAM or
flash. If a needed block is in the cache, an idle disk does not have to be restarted to
satisfy the read. Similarly, if a write to the disk can be buffered in the cache, a
stopped disk does not have to restarted just to handle the write. The disk can
remain off until the cache fills up or a read miss happens.
Another way to avoid unnecessary disk starts is for the operating system to
keep running programs informed about the disk state by sending them messages or
signals. Some programs have discretionary writes that can be skipped or delayed.
For example, a word processor may be set up to write the file being edited to disk
ev ery few minutes. If at the moment it would normally write the file out, the word
processor knows that the disk is off, it can delay this write until it is turned on.
The CPU
The CPU can also be managed to save energy. In particular, a CPU can be put
to sleep in software, reducing power usage to almost zero. The only thing it can do
in this state is wake up when an interrupt occurs. Therefore, whenever the CPU
goes idle, either waiting for I/O or because there is no work to do, it goes to sleep.
On many computers, there is a relationship between CPU voltage, clock cycle,
and power usage. The CPU voltage can often be reduced in software, which saves
energy but also reduces the clock cycle (approximately linearly). Since power 
consumed is proportional to the square of the voltage, cutting the voltage in half makes
the CPU about half as fast but at 1/4 the power.
This property can be exploited for programs with well-defined deadlines, such
as multimedia viewers that have to decompress and display a frame every 40 msec,
but go idle if they do it faster. Suppose that a CPU uses x joules while running full
