928
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
single program can host two different dynamic code libraries, each of which may
want to load the same Windows library—yet have different version requirements
for that library.
A better solution would be hosting code in separate processes. But 
out-of-process hosting of code results has lower performance and makes for a more 
complicated programming model in many cases. Microsoft has yet to develop a good 
solution for all of this complexity in user mode. It makes one yearn for the relative 
simplicity of kernel mode.
One of the reasons that kernel mode has less complexity than user mode is that
it supports relatively few extensibility opportunities outside of the device-driver
model. In Windows, system functionality is extended by writing user-mode 
services. This worked well enough for subsystems, and works even better when only a
few new services are being provided rather than a complete operating system 
personality. There are few functional differences between services implemented in the
kernel and services implemented in user-mode processes. Both the kernel and
process provide private address spaces where data structures can be protected and
service requests can be scrutinized.
However, there can be significant performance differences between services in
the kernel vs. services in user-mode processes. Entering the kernel from user mode
is slow on modern hardware, but not as slow as having to do it twice because you
are switching back and forth to another process. Also cross-process 
communication has lower bandwidth. Unfortunately, the cost of switching between user-mode
and kernel-mode has been increasing especially with security mitigations that were
implemented against CPU side-channel vulnerabilities like Spectre and Meltdown,
disclosed in 2018.
Kernel-mode code can (carefully) access data at the user-mode addresses 
passed as parameters to its system calls. With user-mode services, either those data
must be copied to the service process, or some games be played by mapping 
memory back and forth (the ALPC facilities in Windows handle this under the covers).
Windows makes significant use of user-mode service processes to extend the
functionality of the system. Some of these services are strongly tied to the 
operation of kernel-mode components, such as lsass.exe which is the local security
authentication service which manages the token objects that represent user-identity,
as well as managing encryption keys used by the file system. The user-mode 
plugand-play manager is responsible for determining the correct driver to use when a
new hardware device is encountered, installing it, and telling the kernel to load it.
Many facilities provided by third parties, such as antivirus and digital rights 
management, are implemented as a combination of kernel-mode drivers and user-mode
services.
The Windows taskmgr.exe has a tab which identifies the services running on
the system. Multiple services can be seen to be running in the same process
(svchost.exe). Windows does this for many of its own boot-time services to reduce
the time needed to start up the system and to lower memory usage. Services can be
