SEC. 11.1
HISTORY OF WINDOWS THROUGH WINDOWS 11
877
had moved from floppy, to CD, and with Windows Vista, to DVD. Technology had
been keeping up, however, and faster processors and larger memories made it 
possible for computers to get faster despite all this bloat.
Unfortunately for Microsoft, Windows Vista was released at a time when 
customers were becoming enthralled with inexpensive computers, such as low-end
notebooks and netbook computers. These machines used slower processors to save
cost and battery life, and in their earlier generations limited memory sizes. At the
same time, processor performance ceased to improve at the same rate it had 
previously due to the difficulties in dissipating the heat created by ever-increasing clock
speeds. Moore’s law continued to hold, but the additional transistors were going
into new features and multiple processors rather than improvements in 
single-processor performance. The substantial growth in Windows Vista meant that it 
performed poorly on these computers relative to Windows XP, and the release was
never widely accepted.
The issues with Windows Vista were addressed in the subsequent release,
Windows 7. Microsoft invested heavily in testing and performance automation,
new telemetry technology, and extensively strengthened the teams charged with
improving performance, reliability, and security. Though Windows 7 had relatively
few functional changes compared to Windows Vista, it was better engineered and
more efficient. Windows 7 quickly supplanted Vista and ultimately Windows XP to
be the most popular version of Windows within a few years after its release.
11.1.5 Windows 8
By the time Windows 7 finally shipped, the computing industry once again
began to change dramatically. The success of the Apple iPhone as a portable 
computing device, and the advent of the Apple iPad, had heralded a sea-change which
led to the dominance of lower-cost Android phones and tablets, much as Microsoft
had dominated the desktop in the first three decades of personal computing. Small,
portable, yet powerful devices and ubiquitous fast networks were creating a world
where mobile computing and network-based services were becoming the dominant
paradigm. The old world of desktop and notebook computers was replaced by
machines with small screens that ran applications readily downloadable from 
dedicated app stores. These applications were not the traditional variety, like word
processing, spreadsheets, and connecting to corporate servers. Instead, they 
provided access to services such as Web search, social networking, games, Wikipedia,
streaming music and video, shopping, and personal navigation. The business 
models for computing were also changing, with user data collection and advertising
opportunities becoming the largest economic force behind computing.
Microsoft began a process to redesign itself as a devices and services company
in order to better compete with Google and Apple. It needed an operating system it
could deploy across a wide spectrum of devices: phones, tablets, game consoles,
laptops, desktops, servers, and the cloud. Windows thus underwent an even bigger
