1018
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
per-VTL SLAT. The IOMMU is leveraged to enforce memory access protection for
devices. As such, it is not possible for even kernel-mode code to circumvent these
protections. Similar to how CPUs implement different privilege levels, each VTL
has its own virtual processor state, isolated from lower VTLs. A virtual processor
can transition between VTLs (similar to making a system call from user-mode into
kernel-mode and back). When entering a particular VTL, the VP context is updated
with the target VTL processor state and the VP is subject to that VTL’s memory
access protections. Higher VTLs can also prevent lower VTLs from accessing or
modifying privileged CPU registers or I/O ports, which could otherwise be used to
disable the hypervisor or tamper with secure devices (like fingerprint readers).
Finally, each VTL has its own interrupt subsystem, such that it can enable, disable,
and dispatch interrupts without interference from lower VTLs. Even though many
VTLs can be supported by the hypervisor, we will focus on VTL0 and VTL1 in
this chapter.
VTL0 is the VSM normal mode in which Windows, with its user-mode and
kernel-mode components, runs. VTL1 is referred to as the secure mode in which a
security-focused micro-OS called the Secure Kernel runs. Figure 11-54 shows this
organization. The Secure Kernel provides various security services to Windows as
well as IUM (Isolated User Mode) the ability to run VTL1 user-mode programs
which are completely shielded from VTL0. Windows includes IUM processes,
called trustlets, which securely manage user credentials, encryption keys, as well
as biometric information for fingerprint or face authentication. The overall 
collection of these security mechanisms is termed VBS.
In the next section, we are going to cover the basics of Windows security and
then go deeper into various security services provided by VBS.
11.11 SECURITY IN WINDOWS
NT was originally designed to meet the U.S. Department of Defense’s C2
security requirements (DoD 5200.28-STD), the Orange Book, which secure DoD
systems must meet. This standard requires operating systems to have certain 
properties in order to be classified as secure enough for certain kinds of military work.
Although Windows was not specifically designed for C2 compliance, it inherits
many security properties from the original security design of NT, including these:
1. Secure login with anti-spoofing measures.
2. Discretionary access controls.
3. Privileged access controls.
4. Address-space protection per process.
5. New pages must be zeroed before being mapped in.
6. Security auditing.
