788
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
which puts in its tables a v-node for the file that points to the r-node. Again here
we see that every open file or directory has a v-node that points to either an r-node
or an i-node.
The caller is given a file descriptor for the remote file. This file descriptor is
mapped onto the v-node by tables in the VFS layer. Note that no table entries are
made on the server side. Although the server is prepared to provide file handles
upon request, it does not keep track of which files happen to have file handles 
outstanding and which do not. When a file handle is sent to it for file access, it checks
the handle, and if it is valid, uses it. Validation can include verifying an 
authentication key contained in the RPC headers, if security is enabled.
When the file descriptor is used in a subsequent system call, for example, read,
the VFS layer locates the corresponding v-node, and from that determines whether
it is local or remote and also which i-node or r-node describes it. It then sends a
message to the server containing the handle, the file offset (which is maintained on
the client side, not the server side), and the byte count. For efficiency reasons,
transfers between client and server are done in large chunks, normally 8192 bytes,
ev en if fewer bytes are requested. The chunk size is configurable, up to a limit, and
must be a multiple of 4 KB.
When the request message arrives at the server, it is passed to the VFS layer
there, which determines which local file system holds the requested file. The VFS
layer then makes a call to that local file system to read and return the bytes. These
data are then passed back to the client. After the client’s VFS layer has gotten the
8-KB chunk it asked for, it automatically issues a request for the next chunk, so it
will have it should it be needed shortly. This feature, known as read ahead,
improves performance considerably.
For writes, an analogous path is followed from client to server. Also, transfers
are done in 8-KB chunks here, too. If a wr ite system call supplies fewer than 8 KB
of data, the data are just accumulated locally. Only when the entire 8-KB chunk is
full is it sent to the server. Howev er, when a file is closed, all of its data are sent to
the server immediately.
Another technique used to improve performance is caching, as in ordinary
UNIX. Servers cache data to avoid disk accesses, but this is invisible to the clients.
Clients maintain two caches, one for file attributes (i-nodes) and one for file data.
When either an i-node or a file block is needed, a check is made to see if it can be
satisfied out of the cache. If so, network traffic can be avoided.
While client caching helps performance enormously, it also introduces some
nasty problems. Suppose that two clients are both caching the same file block and
one of them modifies it. When the other one reads the block, it gets the old (stale)
value. The cache is not coherent.
Given the potential severity of this problem, the NFS implementation does 
several things to mitigate it. For one, associated with each cache block is a timer.
When the timer expires, the entry is discarded. Normally, the timer is 3 sec for data
blocks and 30 sec for directory blocks. Doing this reduces the risk somewhat. In
