SEC. 2.7
SUMMARY
173
round robin, priority scheduling, multilevel queues, guaranteed scheduling, lottery
scheduling, and fair-share scheduling. Some systems make a clean separation
between the scheduling mechanism and the scheduling policy, which allows users
to have control of the scheduling algorithm.
PROBLEMS
1. In Fig. 2-2, three process states are shown. In theory, with three states, there could be
six transitions, two out of each state. However, only four transitions are shown. Are
there any circumstances in which either or both of the missing transitions might occur?
2. Suppose that you were to design an advanced computer architecture that did process
switching in hardware, instead of having interrupts. What information would the CPU
need? Describe how the hardware process switching might work.
3. On all current computers, at least part of the interrupt handlers are written in assembly
language. Why?
4. When an interrupt or a system call transfers control to the operating system, a kernel
stack area separate from the stack of the interrupted process is generally used. Why?
5. A computer system has enough room to hold fiv e programs in its main memory. These
programs are idle waiting for I/O half the time. What fraction of the CPU time is
wasted?
6. A computer has 4 GB of RAM of which the operating system occupies 512 MB. The
processes are all 256 MB (for simplicity) and have the same characteristics. If the goal
is 99% CPU utilization, what is the maximum I/O wait that can be tolerated?
7. Multiple jobs can run in parallel and finish faster than if they had run sequentially.
Suppose that two jobs, each needing 20 minutes of CPU time, start simultaneously.
How long will the last one take to complete if they run sequentially? How long if they
run in parallel? Assume 50% I/O wait.
8. Consider a multiprogrammed system with degree of 6 (i.e., six programs in memory at
the same time). Assume that each process spends 40% of its time waiting for I/O. What
will be the CPU utilization?
9. Assume that you are trying to download a large 2-GB file from the Internet. The file is
available from a set of mirror servers, each of which can deliver a subset of the file’s
bytes; assume that a given request specifies the starting and ending bytes of the file.
Explain how you might use threads to improve the download time.
10. In the text it was stated that the model of Fig. 2-10(a) was not suited to a file server
using a cache in memory. Why not? Could each process have its own cache?
11. If a multithreaded process forks, a problem occurs if the child gets copies of all the
