SEC. 5.6
USER INTERFACES: KEYBOARD, MOUSE, & MONITOR
403
with its own escape sequences. As a consequence, it was difficult to write software
that worked on more than one terminal type.
One solution, which was introduced in Berkeley UNIX, was a terminal 
database called termcap. This software package defined a number of basic actions,
such as moving the cursor to (row, column). To move the cursor to a particular
location, the software, say, an editor, used a generic escape sequence which was
then converted to the actual escape sequence for the terminal being written to. In
this way, the editor worked on any terminal that had an entry in the termcap 
database. Much UNIX software still works this way, even on personal computers.
Eventually, the industry saw the need for standardizing the escape sequence, so
an ANSI standard was developed. Some of the values are shown in Fig. 5-32.
Escape sequence
Meaning
ESC [ n A
Move up n lines
ESC [ n B
Move down n lines
ESC [ n C
Move right n spaces
ESC [ n D
Move left n spaces
ESC [ m ; n H
Move cursor to (m,n)
ESC [ s J
Clear screen from cursor (0 to end, 1 from start, 2 all)
ESC [ s K
Clear line from cursor (0 to end, 1 from start, 2 all)
ESC [ n L
Inser t n lines at cursor
ESC [ n M
Delete n lines at cursor
ESC [ n P
Delete n chars at cursor
ESC [ n @
Inser t n chars at cursor
ESC [ n m
Enable rendition n (0 = normal, 4 = bold, 5 = blinking, 7 = rev erse)
ESC M
Scroll the screen backward if the cursor is on the top line
Figure 5-32. The ANSI escape sequences accepted by the terminal driver on 
output. ESC denotes the ASCII escape character (0x1B), and n, m, and s are 
optional numeric parameters.
Consider how these escape sequences might be used by a text editor. Suppose
that the user types a command telling the editor to delete all of line 3 and then
close up the gap between lines 2 and 4. The editor might send the following
escape sequence over the serial line to the terminal:
ESC [ 3 ; 1 H ESC [ 0 K ESC [ 1 M
(where the spaces are used above only to separate the symbols; they are not 
transmitted). This sequence moves the cursor to the start of line 3, erases the entire line,
and then deletes the now-empty line, causing all the lines starting at 5 to move up
one line. Then what was line 4 becomes line 3; what was line 5 becomes line 4,
and so on. Analogous escape sequences can be used to add text to the middle of the
display. Words can be added or removed in a similar way.
