480
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
space—commonly referred to as containers or jails. There are many differences
with hypervisor-based virtualization. The main one is that while a container may
look like an isolated computer (with its own devices, its own memory, etc.), the
underlying operating system is fixed and cannot be replaced by another. A second
important difference is that since all containers use the same underlying operating
system (and hence share its resources), the isolation between containers is less
complete than that between virtual machines. A third difference is that, precisely
because the containers directly use the services of a single operating system, they
are often more lightweight and efficient than hypervisor-based solutions. In this
chapter, our main focus is on hypervisor-based virtualization, but we will discuss
OS-level virtualization also.
7.1 HISTORY
With all the hype surrounding virtualization in recent years, we sometimes 
forget that by Internet standards virtual machines are ancient. As early as the 1960s.
IBM experimented with not just one but two independently developed hypervisors:
SIMMON and CP-40. While CP-40 was a research project, it was reimplemented
as CP-67 to form the control program of CP/CMS, a virtual machine operating
system for the IBM System/360 Model 67. Later, it was reimplemented again and
released as VM/370 for the System/370 series in 1972. The System/370 line was
replaced by IBM in the 1990s by the System/390. This was essentially just a name
change since the underlying architecture remained the same for reasons of 
backward compatibility. Of course, the hardware technology was greatly improved and
the newer machines were bigger and faster than the older ones, but as far as 
virtualization was concerned, nothing changed. In 2000, IBM released the z-series,
which supported 64-bit virtual address spaces but was otherwise backward 
compatible with the System/360. All of these systems supported virtualization decades
before it became popular on the x86.
In 1974, two computer scientists at UCLA, Gerald Popek and Robert 
Goldberg, published a seminal paper (‘‘Formal Requirements for Virtualizable Third
Generation Architectures’’) that listed exactly what conditions a computer 
architecture should satisfy in order to support virtualization efficiently (Popek and 
Goldberg, 1974). It is impossible to write a chapter on virtualization without referring to
their work and terminology. Famously, the well-known x86 architecture that also
originated in the 1970s did not meet these requirements for decades. It was not the
only one. Nearly every architecture since the mainframe also failed the test. The
1970s were very productive, seeing also the birth of UNIX, Ethernet, the Cray-1,
Microsoft, and Apple—so, despite what your parents may say, the 1970s were not
just about disco!
In fact, the real Disco revolution started in the 1990s, when researchers at 
Stanford University developed a new hypervisor by that name and went on to found
VMware, a virtualization giant that offers type 1 and type 2 hypervisors and now
