SEC. 11.2
PROGRAMMING WINDOWS
887
and a driver object is created holding its properties and providing pointers to the
functions it implements for processing the I/O requests. Within the operating 
system, the driver is then referred to by using its object. The driver can also be 
accessed directly by name rather than indirectly through the devices it controls (e.g., to
set parameters governing its operation from user mode).
Unlike UNIX, which places the root of its namespace in the file system, the
root of the NT namespace is maintained in the kernel’s virtual memory. This means
that NT must recreate its top-level namespace every time the system boots. Using
kernel virtual memory allows NT to store information in the namespace without
first having to start the file system running. It also makes it much easier for NT to
add new types of kernel-mode objects to the system because the formats of the file
systems themselves do not have to be modified for each new object type.
A named object can be marked permanent, meaning that it continues to exist
until explicitly deleted or the system reboots, even if no process currently has a
handle for the object. Such objects can even extend the NT namespace by 
providing parse routines that allow the objects to function somewhat like mount points in
UNIX. File systems and the registry use this facility to mount volumes and hives
(parts of the registry) onto the NT namespace. Accessing the device object for a
volume gives access to the raw volume, but the device object also represents an
implicit mount of the volume into the NT namespace. The individual files on a 
volume can be accessed by concatenating the volume-relative file name onto the end
of the name of the device object for that volume.
Permanent names are also used to represent synchronization objects and shared
memory, so that they can be shared by processes without being continually 
recreated as processes stop and start. Device objects and often driver objects are given
permanent names, giving them some of the persistence properties of the special 
inodes kept in the /dev directory of UNIX.
We will describe many more of the features in the native NT API in the next
section, where we discuss the Win32 APIs that provide wrappers around the NT
system calls.
11.2.4 The Win32 Application Programming Interface
The Win32 function calls are collectively called the Win32 API. These 
interfaces are publicly disclosed and fully documented. They are implemented as
library procedures that either wrap the native NT system calls used to get the work
done or, in some cases, do the work right in user mode. Though the native NT
APIs are not published, most of the functionality they provide is accessible through
the Win32 API. The existing Win32 API calls do not change with new releases of
Windows to maintain application compatibility, though many new functions are
added to the API.
Figure 11-8 shows various low-level Win32 API calls and the native NT API
calls that they wrap. What is interesting about the figure is how uninteresting the
