SEC. 11.1
HISTORY OF WINDOWS THROUGH WINDOWS 11
873
in all of business history. Had he licensed CP/M to IBM, Kildall would probably
have become the richest man on the planet. Rebuffed by Kildall, IBM came back to
Bill Gates, the cofounder of Microsoft, and asked for help again. Within a short
time, Microsoft bought a CP/M clone from a local company, Seattle Computer
Products, ported it to the IBM PC, and licensed it to IBM. It was then renamed
MS-DOS 1.0 (MicroSoft Disk Operating System) and shipped with the first IBM
PC in 1981.
MS-DOS was a 16-bit real-mode, single-user, command-line-oriented 
operating system consisting of 8 KB of memory resident code. Over the next decade,
both the PC and MS-DOS continued to evolve, adding more features and 
capabilities. By 1986, when IBM built the PC/AT based on the Intel 286, MS-DOS had
grown to be 36 KB, but it continued to be a command-line-oriented, 
one-application-at-a-time, operating system.
11.1.2 1990s: MS-DOS-based Windows
Inspired by the graphical user interface of a system developed by Doug 
Engelbart at Stanford Research Institute and later improved at Xerox PARC, and their
commercial progeny, the Apple Lisa and the Apple Macintosh, Microsoft decided
to give MS-DOS a graphical user interface that it called Windows. The first two
versions of Windows (1985 and 1987) were not very successful, due in part to the
limitations of the PC hardware available at the time. In 1990, Microsoft released
Windows 3.0 for the Intel 386 and sold over one million copies in six months.
Windows 3.0 was not a true operating system, but a graphical environment
built on top of MS-DOS, which was still in control of the machine and the file 
system. All programs ran in the same address space and a bug in any one of them
could bring the whole system to a frustrating halt.
In August 1995, Windows 95 was released. It contained many of the features
of a full-blown operating system, including virtual memory, process management,
and multiprogramming, and introduced 32-bit programming interfaces. However, it
still lacked security, and provided poor isolation between applications and the 
operating system such that a bug in one program can crash the entire system or cause
a system-wide hang. Thus, the problems with instability continued, even with the
subsequent releases of Windows 98 and Windows Me, where MS-DOS was still
there running 16-bit assembly code in the heart of the Windows operating system.
11.1.3 2000s: NT-based Windows
By the end of the 1980s, Microsoft realized that continuing to evolve an 
operating system with MS-DOS at its center was not the best way to go. PC hardware
was continuing to increase in speed and capability and ultimately the PC market
would collide with the desktop, workstation, and enterprise-server computing
