436
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
52. Assuming that it takes 5 nsec to copy a byte, how much time does it take to completely
rewrite the screen of an 80 character × 25 line text mode memory-mapped screen?
What about a 1536 × 2048 pixel graphics screen with 24-bit color?
53. Assuming that it takes 5 nsec to copy a byte, how much time does it take to completely
rewrite the screen of an 80 character × 25 line text mode memory-mapped screen?
What about a 1024 × 768 pixel graphics screen with 24-bit color?
54. In Fig. 5-36 there is a class to RegisterClass. In the corresponding X Window code, in
Fig. 5-34, there is no such call or anything like it. Why not?
55. In the text we gav e an example of how to draw a rectangle on the screen using the 
Windows GDI:
Rectangle(hdc, xleft, ytop, xright, ybottom);
Is there any real need for the first parameter (hdc), and if so, what? After all, the 
coordinates of the rectangle are explicitly specified as parameters.
56. A thin-client terminal is used to display a Web page containing an animated cartoon of
size 400 pixels × 160 pixels running at 20 frames/sec. What fraction of a 1000-Mbps
gigabit Ethernet is consumed by displaying the cartoon?
57. It has been observed that a thin-client system works well with a 1-Mbps network in a
test. Are any problems likely in a multiuser situation? (Hint: Consider a large number
of users watching a scheduled TV show and the same number of users browsing the
World Wide Web.)
58. Describe two advantages and two disadvantages of thin client computing.
59. If a CPU’s maximum voltage, V, is cut to V/n, its power consumption drops to 1/n2 of
its original value and its clock speed drops to 1/n of its original value. Suppose that a
user is typing at 1 char/sec, but the CPU time required to process each character is 100
msec. What is the optimal value of n and what is the corresponding energy saving in
percent compared to not cutting the voltage? Assume that an idle CPU consumes no
energy at all.
60. A notebook computer is set up to take maximum advantage of power saving features
including shutting down the display and the hard disk after periods of inactivity. A user
sometimes runs UNIX programs in text mode, and at other times uses the X Window
System. She is surprised to find that battery life is significantly better when she uses
text-only programs. Why?
61. Write a program that simulates stable storage. Use two large fixed-length files on your
disk to simulate the two disks.
62. Write a program to implement the three disk-arm scheduling algorithms. Write a driver
program that generates a sequence of cylinder numbers (0–999) at random, runs the
three algorithms for this sequence and prints out the total distance (number of 
cylinders) the arm needs to traverse in the three algorithms.
