SEC. 11.5
MEMORY MANAGEMENT
965
of soft faults is demand-zero faults. These indicate that a zeroed page should be
allocated and mapped in, for example, when the first access to a VirtualAlloc’d
address occurs. When trimming private pages from process working sets, Windows
checks if the page is entirely zero. If so, instead of putting the page on the modified
list and writing it out to the pagefile, the memory manager frees the page and
encodes the PTE to indicate a demand-zero fault on next access. Soft faults can
also occur because pages have been compressed to effectively increase the size of
physical memory. For most configurations of CPU, memory, and I/O in current
systems, it is more efficient to use compression rather than incur the I/O expense
(performance and energy) required to read a page from disk. We will cover 
memory compression in more detail later in this section.
When a physical page is no longer mapped by the page table in any process, it
goes onto one of three lists: free, modified, or standby. Pages that will never be
needed again, such as stack pages of a terminating process, are freed immediately.
Pages that may be faulted again go to either the modified list or the standby list,
depending on whether or not the dirty bit was set for any of the page table entries
that mapped the page since it was last read from disk. Pages in the modified list
will be eventually written to disk, then moved to the standby list.
Since soft faults are much quicker to satisfy than hard faults, a big performance
improvement opportunity is to prepage or prefetch into the standby list, data that
is expected to be used soon. Windows makes heavy use of prefetch in several
ways:
1. Page fault clustering: When satisfying hard page faults from files or
from the pagefile, the memory manager reads additional pages, up to
a total of 64 KB, as long as the next page in the file corresponds to the
next virtual page. That is almost always the case for regular files so
mechanisms like pagefile reservations we described earlier in the 
section help clustering efficiency for pagefiles.
2. Application-launch prefetching: Application launches are generally
very consistent from launch to launch: the same application and DLL
pages are accessed. Windows takes advantage of this behavior by
tracing the set of file pages accessed during an application launch,
persisting this history on disk, identifying those pages that are indeed
consistently accessed and prefetching them during the next launch
potentially seconds before the application actually needs them. When
the pages to prefetch are already resident in memory, no disk I/Os are
issued, but when they are not, application-launch prefetch routinely
issues hundreds of I/O requests to disk which significantly improves
disk read efficiency on both rotational and solid state disks.
3. Working set in-swap: The working set of a process in Windows is
composed of the set of user-mode virtual addresses that are mapped
by valid PTEs, that is, addresses that can be accessed without a page
