800
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
10.8.3 Design Goals
A number of key design goals for the Android platform evolved during its
development:
1. Provide a complete open-source platform for mobile devices. The
open-source part of Android is a bottom-to-top operating system
stack, including a variety of applications, that can ship as a complete
product.
2. Strongly support proprietary third-party applications with a robust
and stable API. As previously discussed, it is challenging to maintain
a platform that is both truly open source and also stable enough for
proprietary third-party applications. Android uses a mix of technical
solutions (specifying a very well-defined SDK and division between
public APIs and internal implementation) and policy requirements
(through the CDD) to address this.
3. Allow all third-party applications, including those from Google, to
compete on a level playing field. The Android open source code is
designed to be neutral as much as possible to the higher-level system
features built on top of it, from access to cloud services (such as data
sync or cloud-to-device messaging APIs), to libraries (such as
Google’s mapping library) and rich services like application stores.
4. Provide an application security model in which users do not have to
deeply trust third-party applications and do not need to rely on a 
gatekeeper (like a carrier) to control which applications can be installed
on the device in order to protect them. The operating system itself
must protect the user from misbehavior of applications, not only
buggy applications that can cause it to crash, but more subtle misuse
of the device and the user’s data on it. The less users need to trust
applications or the sources of those applications, the more freedom
they hav e to try out and install them.
5. Support typical mobile user interaction, where the user often spends
short amounts of time in many apps. The mobile experience tends to
involve brief interactions with applications: glancing at new received
email, receiving and sending an SMS message or IM, going to 
contacts to place a call, etc. The system needs to optimize for these cases
with fast app launch and switch times; the goal for Android has 
generally been 200 msec to cold start a basic application up to the point
of showing a full interactive UI.
6. Manage application processes for users, simplifying the user 
experience around applications so that users do not have to worry about
