PREFACE
xxvii
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Andrew S. Tanenbaum has an S.B. degree from M.I.T. and a Ph.D. from the
University of California at Berkeley. He is currently a Professor Emeritus of 
Computer Science at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. He was
formerly Dean of the Advanced School for Computing and Imaging, an 
interuniversity graduate school doing research on advanced parallel, distributed, and 
imaging systems. He was also an Academy Professor of the Royal Netherlands 
Academy of Arts and Sciences, which has saved him from turning into a bureaucrat. He
also won a prestigious European Research Council Advanced Grant.
In the past, he has done research on compilers, reliable operating systems, 
networking, and distributed systems. This research has led to over 200 refereed 
publications in journals and conferences. Prof. Tanenbaum has also authored or 
coauthored fiv e books, which have been translated into over 20 languages, ranging
from Basque to Thai. They are used at universities all over the world. There are
163 versions of his books.
Prof. Tanenbaum has also produced a considerable volume of software, 
notably MINIX, a small UNIX clone. It was the direct inspiration for Linux and the
platform on which Linux was initially developed. The current version of MINIX,
called MINIX 3, is now focused on being an extremely reliable and secure 
operating system. Prof. Tanenbaum will consider his work done when no user has any
idea what an operating system crash is. MINIX 3 is an ongoing open-source 
project to which you are invited to contribute. Go to www.minix3.org to download a
free copy of MINIX 3 and give it a try. Both x86 and ARM versions are available.
Prof. Tanenbaum’s Ph.D. students have gone on to greater glory after 
graduating. Some have become professors; others have fulfilled leading roles in 
government organizations and industry. He is very proud of them. In this respect, he
resembles a mother hen.
Prof. Tanenbaum is a Fellow of the ACM, a Fellow of the IEEE, and a member
of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has also won 
numerous scientific prizes from ACM, IEEE, and USENIX. If you are unbearably 
curious about them, see his page on Wikipedia. He also has two honorary doctorates.
Herbert Bos obtained his Master’s degree from Twente University and his
Ph.D. from Cambridge University in the United Kingdom. Since then, he has
worked extensively on dependable and efficient I/O architectures for operating 
systems like Linux, but also research systems based on MINIX 3. He is currently a
professor at the VUSec Systems Security Research Group in the Department of
Computer Science at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. His
main research field is systems security.
With his group, he discovered and analyzed many vulnerabilities in both 
hardware and software. From buggy memory chips to vulnerable CPUs, and from flaws
in operating systems to novel exploitation techniques, the research has led to fixes
