346
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
each set of registers with the relevant parameters for its transfer. Each transfer must
use a different device controller. After each word is transferred (steps 2 through 4)
in Fig. 5-4, the DMA controller decides which device to service next. It may be set
up to use a round-robin algorithm, or it may have a priority scheme design to favor
some devices over others. Multiple requests to different device controllers may be
pending at the same time, provided that there is an unambiguous way to tell the
acknowledgements apart. Often a different acknowledgement line on the bus is
used for each DMA channel for this reason.
Many buses can operate in two modes: word-at-a-time mode and block mode.
Often, DMA controllers can also operate in either mode. In the former mode, the
operation is as described above: the DMA controller requests the transfer of one
word and gets it. If the CPU also wants the bus, it has to wait. The mechanism is
called cycle stealing because the device controller sneaks in and steals an 
occasional bus cycle from the CPU once in a while, delaying it slightly. In block mode,
the DMA controller tells the device to acquire the bus, issue a series of transfers,
then release the bus. This form of operation is called burst mode. It is more 
efficient than cycle stealing because acquiring the bus takes time and multiple words
can be transferred for the price of one bus acquisition. The downside to burst mode
is that it can block the CPU and other devices for a substantial period if a long
burst is being transferred.
In the model we have been discussing, sometimes called fly-by mode, the
DMA controller tells the device controller to transfer the data directly to main
memory. An alternative mode that some DMA controllers use is to have the device
controller send the word to the DMA controller, which then issues a second bus
request to write the word to wherever it is supposed to go. This scheme requires an
extra bus cycle per word transferred, but is more flexible in that it can also perform
device-to-device copies and even memory-to-memory copies (by first issuing a
read to memory and then issuing a write to memory at a different address).
Most DMA controllers use physical memory addresses for their transfers.
Using physical addresses requires the operating system to convert the virtual 
address of the intended memory buffer into a physical address and write this physical
address into the DMA controller’s address register. An alternative scheme used in a
few DMA controllers is to write virtual addresses into the DMA controller instead.
Then the DMA controller must use the MMU to have the virtual-to-physical 
translation done. Only when the MMU is part of the memory (possible, but rare), rather
than part of the CPU, can virtual addresses be put on the bus. In Chap. 7, we will
see that an IOMMU (an MMU for I/O) offers similar functionality: it translates the
virtual addresses used by devices to physical addresses. In other words, the virtual
address of a buffer used by a device may be different from the virtual address used
for the same buffer by the CPU, while both are different from the corresponding
physical address.
We mentioned earlier that before DMA can start, the disk first reads data into
its internal buffer. You may be wondering why the controller does not just store the
