704
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
and data structures are similar, but there are some differences. To make the 
examples concrete, it is best to choose one of them and describe it consistently. Since
most readers are more likely to have encountered Linux than any of the others, we
will use it as our running example, but again be aware that except for the 
information on implementation, much of this chapter applies to all UNIX systems. A
large number of books have been written on how to use UNIX, but there are also
some about advanced features and system internals (Love, 2013; McKusick et al.,
2014; Nemeth et al., 2013; Ostrowick, 2013; Sobell, 2014; Stevens and Rago,
2013; and Vahalia, 2007).
10.1 HISTORY OF UNIX AND LINUX
UNIX and Linux have a long and interesting history, so we will begin our
study there. What started out as the pet project of one young researcher (Ken
Thompson) has become a billion-dollar industry involving universities, 
multinational corporations, governments, and international standardization bodies. In
the following pages, we will tell how this story has unfolded.
10.1.1 UNICS
Way back in the 1940s and 1950s, all computers were personal computers in
the sense that the then-normal way to use a computer was to sign up for an hour of
time and take over the entire machine for that period. Of course, these machines
were physically immense, but only one person (the programmer) could use them at
any giv en time. When batch systems took over, in the 1960s, the programmer 
submitted a job on punched cards by bringing it to the machine room. When enough
jobs had been assembled, the operator read them all in as a single batch. It usually
took an hour or more after submitting a job until the output was returned. Under
these circumstances, debugging was a time-consuming process, because a single
misplaced comma might result in wasting several hours of the programmer’s time.
To get around what everyone viewed as an unsatisfactory, unproductive, and
frustrating arrangement, timesharing was invented at Dartmouth College and
M.I.T. The Dartmouth system ran only BASIC and enjoyed a short-term 
commercial success before vanishing. The M.I.T. system, CTSS, was general purpose and
was a big success in the scientific community. Within a short time, researchers at
M.I.T. joined forces with Bell Labs and General Electric (then a computer vendor)
and began designing a second-generation system, MULTICS (MULTiplexed
Information and Computing Service), as we discussed in Chap. 1.
Although Bell Labs was one of the founding partners in the MULTICS project,
it later pulled out, which left one of the Bell Labs researchers, Ken Thompson,
looking around for something interesting to do. He eventually decided to write a
stripped-down MULTICS all by himself (in assembly language this time) on an old
