16
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
own computer, the microprocessor chip made it possible for a single individual to
have his or her own personal computer.
In 1974, when Intel came out with the 8080, the first general-purpose 8-bit
CPU, it wanted an operating system for it, in part to be able to test it. Intel asked
one of its consultants, Gary Kildall, to write one. Kildall and a friend first built a
controller for the newly released Shugart Associates 8-inch floppy disk and hooked
the floppy disk up to the 8080, thus producing the first microcomputer with a disk.
Kildall then wrote a disk-based operating system called CP/M (Control Program
for Microcomputers) for it. Since Intel did not think that disk-based 
microcomputers had much of a future, when Kildall asked for the rights to CP/M, Intel 
granted his request. Kildall then formed a company, Digital Research, to further develop
and sell CP/M.
In 1977, Digital Research rewrote CP/M to make it suitable for running on the
many microcomputers using the 8080, Zilog Z80, and other CPU chips. Many
application programs were written to run on CP/M, allowing it to completely 
dominate the world of microcomputing for about 5 years.
In the early 1980s, IBM designed the IBM PC and looked around for software
to run on it. People from IBM contacted Bill Gates to license his BASIC 
interpreter. They also asked him if he knew of an operating system to run on the PC.
Gates suggested that IBM contact Digital Research, then the world’s dominant
operating systems company. Making what was without a doubt the worst business
decision in recorded history, Kildall refused to meet with IBM, sending a 
subordinate instead. To make matters even worse, his lawyer even refused to sign IBM’s
nondisclosure agreement covering the not-yet-announced PC. Consequently, IBM
went back to Gates asking if he could provide them with an operating system.
When IBM came back to him, Gates quickly realized that a local computer
manufacturer, Seattle Computer Products, had a suitable operating system, DOS
(Disk Operating System). He approached them and asked to buy it (allegedly for
$75,000), which they readily accepted. Gates then offered IBM a DOS/BASIC
package, which IBM accepted. IBM wanted certain modifications, so Gates hired
the person who wrote DOS, Tim Paterson, as an employee of Gates’ fledgling
company, Microsoft, to make them. The revised system was renamed MS-DOS
(MicroSoft Disk Operating System) and quickly came to dominate the IBM PC
market. A key factor here was Gates’ (in retrospect, extremely wise) decision to
sell MS-DOS to computer companies for bundling with their hardware, compared
to Kildall’s attempt to sell CP/M to end users one at a time (at least initially).
After all this transpired, Kildall died suddenly and unexpectedly from causes that
have not been fully disclosed.
By the time the successor to the IBM PC, the IBM PC/AT, came out in 1983
with the Intel 80286 CPU, MS-DOS was firmly entrenched and CP/M was on its
last legs. MS-DOS was later widely used on the 80386 and 80486. Although the
initial version of MS-DOS was fairly primitive, subsequent versions included more
advanced features, including many taken from UNIX. (Microsoft was well aware
