914
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
structures of kernel components. Phase 1 starts all the remaining processors and
completes final initialization of all kernel components. At the end of Phase 1, once
the I/O manager is initialized, boot drivers are started and file systems are 
mounted, the rest of OS boot can proceed to load new binaries from disk.
The first user-mode process to get started during boot is smss.exe which is 
similar to /etc/init in UNIX systems. Smss first completes the initialization of the
subsystem-independent parts of the operating system by creating any configured
paging files and finalizing registry initialization by loading the remaining hives.
Then it starts acting as a session manager: it launches new instances of itself to 
initialize Session 0, the non-interactive session, and Session 1, the interactive session.
These child smss instances are responsible for enumerating and starting NT 
subsystems which are listed under the HKLM\ SYSTEM\ CurrentControlSet\ 
Control\ Session Manager\ Subsystems registry key. On Windows 11, the only 
supported subsystem is the Windows subsystem, so the child smss instance starts the 
Windows subsystem process, csrss.exe. Then the Session 0 instance executes the
wininit.exe process to initialize the rest of the Windows subsystem while the 
Session 1 instance starts the winlogon.exe process to allow the interactive user to log
in.
The Windows boot sequence has logic to deal with common problems users
encounter when booting the system fails. Sometimes installation of a bad device
driver, or incorrectly modifying the SYSTEM hive can prevent the system from
booting successfully. To recover from these situations, Windows boot manager
allows users to launch the WinRE (Windows Recovery Environment) WinRE
provides an assortment of tools and automated repair mechanisms. These include
System Restore which allows restoring the boot volume to a previous snapshot.
Another is Startup Repair which is an automated tool that detects and fixes the
most common sources of startup problems. PC Reset performs the equivalent of a
factory reset to bring Windows back to its original state after installation. For cases
where manual intervention may be necessary, WinRE can also launch a command
prompt where the user has access to any command-line tool. Similarly, the system
may be booted in safe-mode where only a minimal set of device drivers and 
services are loaded to minimize the chances of encountering startup failure.
11.3.3 Implementation of the Object Manager
The object manager is probably the single most important component in the
Windows executive, which is why we hav e already introduced many of its 
concepts. As described earlier, it provides a uniform and consistent interface for 
managing system resources and data structures, such as open files, processes, threads,
memory sections, timers, devices, drivers, and semaphores. Even more specialized
objects representing things like kernel transactions, profiles, security tokens, and
Win32 desktops are managed by the object manager. Device objects link together
the descriptions of the I/O system, including providing the link between the NT
