262
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
native file system (NTFS) that has different properties (such as file names in 
Unicode). We will discuss NTFS in Chap. 11. There is also a second file system for
Windows, known as ReFS (Resilient File System), but that one is targeted at the
server version of Windows. In this chapter, when we refer to the MS-DOS or FAT
file systems, we mean FAT -16 and FAT -32 as used on Windows unless specified
otherwise. We will discuss the FAT file systems later in this chapter and NTFS in
Chap. 12, where we will examine Windows 10 in detail. Incidentally, there is also
an even newer FAT -like file system, known as exFAT file system, a Microsoft
extension to FAT -32 that is optimized for flash drives and large file systems.
Many operating systems support two-part file names, with the two parts 
separated by a period, as in prog.c. The part following the period is called the file
extension and usually indicates something about the file. In MS-DOS, for 
example, file names were 1–8 characters, plus an optional extension of 1–3 characters.
In UNIX, the size of the extension, if any, is up to the user, and a file may even
have two or more extensions, as in homepage.html.zip, where .html indicates a Web
page in HTML and .zip indicates that the file (homepage.html) has been 
compressed using the zip program. Some of the more common file extensions and their
meanings are shown in Fig. 4-1.
Extension 
Meaning
.bak 
Backup file
.c 
C source program
.gif 
Compuserve Graphical Interchange For mat image
.html 
Wor ld Wide Web HyperText Mar kup Language document
.jpg 
Still picture encoded with the JPEG standard
.mp3 
Music encoded in MPEG layer 3 audio for mat
.mpg 
Movie encoded with the MPEG standard
.o 
Object file (compiler output, not yet linked)
.pdf 
Por table Document For mat file
.ps 
PostScr ipt file
.tex
Input for the TEX for matting program
.txt 
General text file
.zip 
Compressed archive
Figure 4-1. Some typical file extensions.
In some systems (e.g., all flavors of UNIX), file extensions are just 
conventions and are not enforced by the operating system. A file named file.txt might be
some kind of text file, but that name is more to remind the owner than to convey
any actual information to the computer. On the other hand, a C compiler may 
actually insist that files it is to compile end in .c, and it may refuse to compile them if
they do not. However, the operating system does not care.
