302
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
the obvious problem that if a file grows, it may have to be moved on the disk. The
same problem holds for segments in memory, except that moving a segment in
memory is a relatively fast operation compared to moving a file from one disk
position to another. For this reason, nearly all file systems chop files up into 
fixedsize blocks that need not be adjacent.
Block Size
Once it has been decided to store files in fixed-size blocks, the question arises
how big the block should be. Given the way hard disks are organized, the sector,
the track, and the cylinder are obvious candidates for the unit of allocation
(although these are all device dependent, which is a minus). In flash-based 
systems, the flash page size is another candidate, while in a paging system, the 
memory page size is also a major contender.
Since magnetic disks have served as the storage work horse for years and led
to many of the design choices, such as the common 4 KB block size still used
today, let us consider them first. On a hard disk, having a large block size means
that every file, even a 1-byte file, ties up an entire block. It also means that small
files waste a large amount of disk space. On the other hand, a small block size
means that most files will span multiple blocks and thus need multiple seeks and
rotational delays to read them, reducing performance. Thus if the allocation unit is
too large, we waste space; if it is too small, we waste time. The block size of 4 KB
is considered a reasonable compromise for average users.
As an example, consider a disk with 1 MB per track, a rotation time of 8.33
msec, and an average seek time of 5 msec. The time in milliseconds to read a block
of k bytes is then the sum of the seek, rotational delay, and transfer times:
5 + 4. 165 + (k/1000000) × 8. 33
The dashed curve of Fig. 4-23 shows the data rate for such a disk as a function of
block size. To compute the space efficiency, we need to make an assumption about
the mean file size. For simplicity, let us assume that all files are 4 KB. While this is
clearly not true in practice, it turns out that modern file systems are littered with
files of a few kilobytes in size (e.g., icons, emojis, and emails) so this is not a crazy
number either. The solid curve of Fig. 4-23 shows the space efficiency as a 
function of block size.
The two curves can be understood as follows. The access time for a block is
completely dominated by the seek time and rotational delay, so giv en that it is
going to cost 9 msec to access a block, the more data that are fetched, the better.
Hence, the data rate goes up almost linearly with block size (until the transfers take
so long that the transfer time begins to matter).
Now consider space efficiency. With 4-KB files and 1-KB, 2-KB, or 4-KB
blocks, files use 4, 2, and 1 block, respectively, with no wastage. With an 8-KB
block and 4-KB files, the space efficiency drops to 50%, and with a 16-KB block it
