524
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
mode, an irreversible transition that gives it access to the low-level hardware.
Nevertheless, it is still a process and able to talk to and rely on the kernel. The only
difference that it uses the VMCALL instruction to make a system call. The Dune
approach was later used for research in dataplane operating systems such as IX
(Belay, 2017) and finally adapted as the foundation for Google’s container solution
gVisor (Young, 2019).
Speaking of containers, the cloud is seeing a shift from being a platform for
tenants to run virtual machines (specified by a virtual disk image) to a platform
used by tenants to run containers specified as Dockerfiles and coordinated by
orchestrators such as Kubernetes. Often, the container runs within a virtual 
machine but the guest operating system is now run by the cloud provider. The latest
trend, called ‘‘serverless’’, further decouples the application logic from its 
environment (Shahrad et al., 2020). The idea here is to allow a service to be automatically
spun up to serve a single function (an RPC over HTTPS) without managing any
aspect of its operating system environment. Amazon calls its serverless 
technology firecracker (Barr, 2018) and Google calls it gVisor (Young, 2019). Serverless
computing has gained even more popularity with the adoption of the 
Function-as-a-Service (FAAS) model (Kim and Lee, 2019). Of course, the operating
system and indeed the server both still exist in serverless operations. But they are
hidden from the developer.
The cloud is therefore much more complex than it was in the beginning with
the original AWS EC2 model of virtual machines: networks are virtualized, and
applications are encapsulated into containers and serverless models that decouple
them from the underlying layers. The cloud is more complex, but also more 
powerful and central to nearly every computing organization. With this importance
comes another consideration: trust. Specifically, how much must a tenant trust the
cloud service provider ? The correct answer is obviously ‘‘as little as necessary.’’
To achieve this goal of minimal trust dependencies, Intel introduced SGX as
the first architectural extension for ‘‘confidential computing.’’ SGX creates
enclaves, which are isolated in hardware from the host operating system and other
applications, with the content of memory and registers cryptographically encrypted
by the hardware. In a way, technologies such as SGX are similar to virtualization
extensions: they create new ways for software to isolate itself from each other.
SGX has notably been used in research to run entire operating systems such as in
Haven (Baumann, 2015) or Linux containers such as in SCONE (Arnautov, 2016).
7.13 SUMMARY
Virtualization is the technique of simulating a computer, but with high 
performance. Typically one computer runs many virtual machines at the same time. This
technique is widely used in data centers to provide cloud computing. In this 
chapter we looked at how virtualization works, especially for paging, I/O, and multicore
systems. We also studied an example: VMWare.
