646
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
1. Challenge sent to smart card
3. Response sent back
Remote!
computer
Smart!
card
2. Smart!
    card!
    computes!
    response
Smart!
card!
reader
Figure 9-16. Use of a smart card for authentication.
A typical biometrics system has two parts: enrollment and identification. 
During enrollment, the user’s characteristics are measured and the results digitized.
Then significant features are extracted and stored in a record associated with the
user. The record can be kept in a central database (e.g., for logging in to a remote
computer), or stored on a smart card that the user carries around and inserts into a
remote reader (e.g., at an ATM machine).
The other part is identification. The user shows up and provides a login name.
Then the system makes the measurement again. If the new values match the ones
sampled at enrollment time, the login is accepted; otherwise it is rejected. The
login name is needed because the measurements are never exact, so it is difficult to
index them and then search the index. Also, two people might have the same 
characteristics, so requiring the measured characteristics to match those of a specific
user is stronger than just requiring them to match those of any user.
The characteristic chosen should have enough variability that the system can
distinguish among many people without error. For example, hair color is not a
good indicator because too many people share the same color. Also, the 
characteristic should not vary over time and with some people, hair color does not have
this property. Similarly a person’s voice may be different due to a cold and a face
may look different due to a beard or makeup not present at enrollment time. Since
later samples are never going to match the enrollment values exactly, the system
designers have to decide how good the match has to be to be accepted. In 
particular, they hav e to decide whether it is worse to reject a legitimate user once in a
while or let an imposter get in once in a while. An e-commerce site might decide
that rejecting a loyal customer might be worse than accepting a small amount of
fraud, whereas a nuclear weapons site might decide that refusing access to a 
genuine employee was better than letting random strangers in twice a year.
An important point here is that any authentication scheme must be 
psychologically acceptable to the user community. Even something as nonintrusive as storing
