850
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
For something to justify being shown as a runtime permission, it must clearly
pass a test: ‘‘Is this something the user easily understands (which generally means
it represents some clear data about them), and can be confident in making a 
decision about releasing access to that data?’’ Users answering yes to a runtime 
permission prompt is them making a statement that they are going to trust that app (and
its developer) with all of that type of personal data on their device.
The INTERNET permission is a good case study in this design process: it was
modified from a dangerous permission shown to the user at install, to a normal 
permission that does not require a runtime prompt and is never shown to the user. The
reasoning behind this is given below:
1. How many applications would ask for this as a runtime 
permission? Most of them, so the user will be confronted with it frequently
and needs to be especially confident about making a good decision.
(Frequent prompts for decisions the user is not confident in can easily
lead to all of the prompts being mostly ignored by them.)
2. Is this protecting some data the user can clearly understand? No.
That makes it harder for the user to understand what is being asked.
3. Is this giving the application an ability the user cares about? Yes.
In a way, apps being able to access the network seems like something
that is of interest to the user’s privacy.
4. Why would a user decide whether or not to give an app the 
permission? A common thought process here is: ‘‘I do not want the app
to access the network so it cannot send my data off the device.’’
5. Deciding to allow access to the network actually has a close 
connection to decisions around giving it access to personal data! That is,
a user saying ‘‘no’’ to the network permission will often lead to them
feeling better about saying ‘‘yes’’ to requests to get access to their
data.
6. Wanting to control network access is thus actually a proxy for 
wanting a guarantee about the app not being able to export any data off the
device. However, that is not what the network permission does. Even
if an app does not have network access, there are many ways it can
export data, even accidentally: for example if it opens the browser on
a Website associated with it, the URL it hands to the browser can 
contain any data it wants, which is then sent to the app’s server.
It is best that network access not be a runtime permission, for multiple 
reasons. It would be requested by most apps, causing the user to be constantly 
confronted with it. They are being asked to make a decision that is not clear how it
impacts them. The main reason that many users would infer why they should say
