SEC. 5.5
CLOCKS
391
Programmable clocks typically have sev eral modes of operation. In one-shot
mode, when the clock is started, it copies the value of the holding register into the
counter and then decrements the counter at each pulse from the crystal. When the
counter gets to zero, it causes an interrupt and stops until it is explicitly started
again by the software. In square-wave mode, after getting to zero and causing the
interrupt, the holding register is automatically copied into the counter, and the
whole process is repeated again indefinitely. These periodic interrupts are called
clock ticks.
The advantage of the programmable clock is that its interrupt frequency can be
controlled by software. If a 500-MHz crystal is used, then the counter is pulsed
ev ery 2 nsec. With (unsigned) 32-bit registers, interrupts can be programmed to
occur at intervals from 2 nsec to 8.6 sec. Programmable clock chips usually 
contain two or three independently programmable clocks and have many other options
as well (e.g., counting up instead of down, interrupts disabled, and more).
To prevent the current time from being lost when the computer’s power is
turned off, most computers have a battery-powered backup clock, implemented
with the kind of low-power circuitry used in digital watches. The battery clock can
be read at startup. If the backup clock is not present, the software may ask the user
for the current date and time. There is also a standard way for a networked system
to get the current time from a remote host. In any case, the time is then translated
into the number of clock ticks since 12 A.M. UTC (Universal Coordinated Time)
(formerly known as Greenwich Mean Time) on January 1, 1970, as UNIX does, or
since some other benchmark moment. The origin of time for Windows is January
1, 1980. At every clock tick, the real time is incremented by one count. Usually
utility programs are provided to manually set the system clock and the backup
clock and to synchronize the two clocks.
5.5.2 Clock Software
All the clock hardware does is generate interrupts at known intervals. 
Everything else involving time must be done by the software, the clock driver. The exact
duties of the clock driver vary among operating systems, but usually include most
of the following:
1. Maintaining the time of day.
2. Preventing processes from running longer than they are allowed to.
3. Accounting for CPU usage.
4. Handling the alar m system call made by user processes.
5. Providing watchdog timers for parts of the system itself.
6. Doing profiling, monitoring, and statistics gathering.
