SEC. 11.8
THE WINDOWS NT FILE SYSTEM
993
directory containing miscellaneous files for things like disk quotas, object 
identifiers, reparse points, and so on. The last four MFT records are reserved for future
use.
Each MFT record consists of a record header followed by the (attribute header,
value) pairs. The record header contains a magic number used for validity 
checking, a sequence number updated each time the record is reused for a new file, a
count of references to the file, the actual number of bytes in the record used, the
identifier (index, sequence number) of the base record (used only for extension
records), and some other miscellaneous fields.
NTFS defines 13 attributes that can appear in MFT records. These are listed in
Fig. 11-45. Each attribute header identifies the attribute and gives the length and
location of the value field along with a variety of flags and other information.
Usually, attribute values follow their attribute headers directly, but if a value is too
long to fit in the MFT record, it may be put in separate disk blocks. Such an
attribute is said to be a nonresident attribute. The data attribute is an obvious
candidate. Some attributes, such as the name, may be repeated, but all attributes
must appear in a fixed order in the MFT record. The headers for resident attributes
are 24 bytes long; those for nonresident attributes are longer because they contain
information about where to find the attribute on disk.
Attribute 
Description
Standard infor mation
Flag bits, timestamps, etc.
File name
File name in Unicode; may be repeated for MS-DOS name
Secur ity descr iptor
Obsolete. Secur ity infor mation is now in $Extend$Secure
Attr ibute list
Location of additional MFT records, if needed
Object ID
64-bit file identifier unique to this volume
Reparse point
Used for mounting and symbolic links
Volume name
Name of this volume (used only in $Volume)
Volume infor mation
Volume version (used only in $Volume)
Index root 
Used for director ies
Index allocation 
Used for ver y large directories
Bitmap 
Used for ver y large directories
Logged utility stream
Controls logging to $LogFile
Data 
Stream data; may be repeated
Figure 11-45. The attributes used in MFT records.
The standard information field contains the file owner, security information,
the timestamps needed by POSIX, the hard-link count, the read-only and archive
bits, and so on. It is a fixed-length field and is always present. The file name is a
variable-length Unicode string. In order to make files with non–MS-DOS names
accessible to old 16-bit programs, files can also have an 8  +  3  MS-DOS short
