986
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
Device object
Instance data
Next device object
Driver object
Driver object
Dispatch table
CREATE
READ
WRITE
FLUSH
IOCTL
CLEANUP
CLOSE
…
Loaded device driver
Driver code
Figure 11-41. A single level in a device stack.
I/O Request Packets
Figure 11-42 shows the major fields in the IRP. The bottom of the IRP is a
dynamically sized array containing fields that can be used by each driver for the
device stack handling the request. These stack fields also allow a driver to specify
the routine to call when completing an I/O request. During completion each level
of the device stack is visited in reverse order, and the completion routine assigned
by each driver is called in turn. At each level, the driver can continue to complete
the request or decide there is still more work to do and leave the request pending,
suspending the I/O completion for the time being.
When allocating an IRP, the I/O manager has to know how deep the particular
of the stack depth in a field in each device object as the device stack is formed.
Note that there is no formal definition of what the next device object is in any
stack. That information is held in private data structures belonging to the previous
driver on the stack. In fact, the stack does not really have to be a stack at all. At any
layer a driver is free to allocate new IRPs, continue to use the original IRP, send an
I/O operation to a different device stack, or even switch to a system worker thread
to continue execution.
The IRP contains flags, an operation code for indexing into the driver dispatch
table, buffer pointers for possibly both kernel and user buffers, and a list of MDLs
(Memory Descriptor Lists) which are used to describe the physical pages 
represented by the buffers, that is, for DMA operations. There are fields used for 
cancellation and completion operations. The fields in the IRP that are used to queue the
IRP to devices while it is being processed are reused when the I/O operation has
finally completed to provide memory for the APC control object used to call the
I/O manager’s completion routine in the context of the original thread. There is
also a link field used to link all the outstanding IRPs to the initiating thread.
