SEC. 8.3
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
583
2T µsec, and then try again. On each further collision, the maximum wait interval
is doubled, reducing the chance of more collisions. This algorithm is known as
binary exponential backoff. We saw it earlier to reduce polling overhead on
locks.
An Ethernet has a maximum cable length and also a maximum number of
computers that can be connected to it. To exceed either of these limits, a large
building or campus can be wired with multiple Ethernets, which are then 
connected by devices called bridges. A bridge is a device that allows traffic to pass
from one Ethernet to another when the source is on one side and the destination is
on the other.
To avoid the problem of collisions, modern Ethernets use switches, as shown in
Fig. 8-28(b). Each switch has some number of ports, to which can be attached a
computer, an Ethernet, or another switch. When a packet successfully avoids all
collisions and makes it to the switch, it is buffered there and sent out on the port
where the destination machine lives. By giving each computer its own port, all
collisions can be eliminated, at the cost of bigger switches. Compromises, with just
a few computers per port, are also possible. In Fig. 8-28(b), a classical Ethernet
with multiple computers connected to a cable by vampire taps is attached to one of
the ports of the switch.
The Internet
The Internet evolved from the ARPANET, an experimental packet-switched
network funded by the U.S. Dept. of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
It went live in December 1969 with three computers in California and one in Utah.
It was designed at the height of the Cold War to a be a highly fault-tolerant 
network that would continue to relay military traffic even in the event of direct nuclear
hits on multiple parts of the network by automatically rerouting traffic around the
dead machines.
The ARPANET grew rapidly in the 1970s, eventually encompassing hundreds
of computers. Then a packet radio network, a satellite network, and eventually
thousands of Ethernets were attached to it, leading to the federation of networks we
now know as the Internet.
The Internet consists of two kinds of computers, hosts and routers. Hosts are
PCs, notebooks, smartphones, tablets, smart watches, servers, mainframes, and
other computers owned by individuals or companies that want to connect to the
Internet. Routers are specialized switching computers that accept incoming 
packets on one of many incoming lines and send them on their way along one of many
outgoing lines. A router is similar to the switch of Fig. 8-28(b), but also differs
from it in ways that will not concern us here. Routers are connected together in
large networks, with each router having wires or fibers to many other routers and
hosts. Large national or worldwide router networks are operated by telephone 
companies and ISPs (Internet Service Providers) for their customers.
