SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
389
However, for the case of a drive crashing, it provides full 1-bit error correction
since the position of the bad bit is known. In the event that a drive crashes, the
controller just pretends that all its bits are 0s. If a word has a parity error, the bit
from the dead drive must have been a 1, so it is corrected. Although both RAID
levels 2 and 3 offer very high data rates, the number of separate I/O requests per
second they can handle is no better than for a single drive.
RAID levels 4 and 5 work with strips again, not individual words with parity,
and do not require synchronized drives. RAID level 4 [see Fig. 5-26(e)] is like
RAID level 0, with a strip-for-strip parity written onto an extra drive. For example,
if each strip is k bytes long, all the strips are EXCLUSIVE ORed together, 
resulting in a parity strip k bytes long. If a drive crashes, the lost bytes can be 
recomputed from the parity drive by reading the entire set of drives.
This design protects against the loss of a drive but performs poorly for small
updates. If one sector is changed, it is necessary to read all the drives in order to
recalculate the parity, which must then be rewritten. Alternatively, it can read the
old user data and the old parity data and recompute the new parity from them.
Even with this optimization, a small update requires two reads and two writes.
As a consequence of the heavy load on the parity drive, it may become a 
bottleneck. This bottleneck is eliminated in RAID level 5  by distributing the parity
bits uniformly over all the drives, round-robin fashion, as shown in Fig. 5-26(f).
However, in the event of a drive crash, reconstructing the contents of the failed
drive is a complex process.
Raid level 6 is similar to RAID level 5, except that an additional parity block is
used. In other words, the data are striped across the disks with two parity blocks
instead of one. As a result, writes are bit more expensive because of the parity 
calculations, but reads incur no performance penalty. It does offer more reliability
(imagine what happens if RAID level 5 encounters a bad block just when it is
rebuilding its array).
Compared to magnetic disks, SSDs offer much better performance and much
higher reliability. Do we still need RAID? The answer may still be yes. After all, a
RAID of multiple SSDs can offer even better performance and reliability than a
single SSD. For instance, RAID level 0 with two SSDs provides sequential read
and write performance that is roughly double that of a single SSD. If sequential
read/write performance is important in your storage stack, this may be a winner. Of
course, RAID level 0 does not help and even diminishes reliability, but maybe that
is less bad for SSDs than for magnetic disks that fail more easily. Moreover, for
reliability we can opt for higher RAID levels, such as RAID level 1. RAID level 1
may improve the read performance (since even if one SSD is busy, the other is still
available), but not write performance as all data must be stored twice and errors
verified. Also, since you can only use half of your storage capacity, RAID level 1
is expensive—especially since compared to magnetic disks, SSDs are not cheap.
Although RAID levels 5 and 6 are also used with SSD, with the benefit of
some performance gains and increased reliability, they do hav e drawbacks. In
