SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
795
Early Development
Android, Inc. was a software company founded to build software to create
smarter mobile devices. Originally looking at cameras, the vision soon switched to
smartphones due to their larger potential market. That initial goal grew to 
addressing the then-current difficulty in developing for mobile devices, by bringing to
them an open platform built on top of Linux that could be widely used.
During this time, prototypes for the platform’s user interface were 
implemented to demonstrate the ideas behind it. The platform itself was targeting three
key languages, JavaScript, Java, and C++, in order to support a rich 
application-development environment.
Google acquired Android in July 2005, providing the necessary resources and
cloud-service support to continue Android development as a complete product. A
fairly small group of engineers worked closely together during this time, starting to
develop the core infrastructure for the platform and foundations for higher-level
application development.
In early 2006, a significant shift in plan was made: instead of supporting 
multiple programming languages, the platform would focus entirely on the Java 
programming language for its application development. This was a difficult change,
as the original multilanguage approach superficially kept everyone happy with ‘‘the
best of all worlds’’; focusing on one language felt like a step backward to engineers
who preferred other languages.
Trying to make everyone happy, howev er, can easily make nobody happy.
Building out three different sets of language APIs would have required much more
effort than focusing on a single language, greatly reducing the quality of each one.
The decision to focus on the Java language was critical for the ultimate quality of
the platform and the development team’s ability to meet important deadlines.
As development progressed, the Android platform was developed closely with
the applications that would ultimately ship on top of it. Google already had a wide
variety of services—including Gmail, Maps, Calendar, YouTube, and of course
Search—that would be delivered on top of Android. Knowledge gained from
implementing these applications on top of the early platform was fed back into its
design. This iterative process with the applications allowed many design flaws in
the platform to be addressed early in its development.
Most of the early application development was done with little of the 
underlying platform actually available to the developers. The platform was usually 
running all inside one process, through a ‘‘simulator’’ that ran all of the system and
applications as a single process on a host computer. In fact there are still some
remnants of this old implementation around today, with things like the 
Application.onTer minate method still in the SDK (Software Dev elopment Kit), which
Android programmers use to write applications.
In June 2006, two hardware devices were selected as software-development
targets for planned products. The first, code-named ‘‘Sooner,’’ was based on an
