1092
READING LIST AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
CHAP. 13
Isloor and Marsland, ‘‘The Deadlock Problem: An Overview’’
A tutorial on deadlocks, with special emphasis on database systems. A variety
of models and algorithms are covered.
Levine, ‘‘Defining Deadlock’’
In Chap. 6 of this book, we focused on resource deadlocks and barely touched
on other kinds. This short paper points out that in the literature, various definitions
have been used, differing in subtle ways. The author then looks at communication,
scheduling, and interleaved deadlocks and comes up with a new model that tries to
cover all of them.
Shub, ‘‘A Unified Treatment of Deadlock’’
This short tutorial summarizes the causes and solutions to deadlocks and 
suggests what to emphasize when teaching it to students.
13.1.7 Virtualization and the Cloud
Portnoy, ‘‘Virtualization Essentials’’
A gentle introduction to virtualization. It covers the context (including the 
relation between virtualization and the cloud), and covers a variety of solutions (with a
bit more emphasis on VMware).
Randal, ‘‘The Ideal Versus the Real: Revisiting the History of Virtual Machines
and Containers’’
Often virtual machines are portrayed as offering better security. This survey
paper catalogues key dev elopments in the evolution of virtual machines and 
containers from the 1950s to today and corrects various common misperceptions about
them with historical details.
Erl et al., ‘‘Cloud Computing: Concepts, Technology & Architecture’’
A book devoted to cloud computing in a broad sense. The authors explain in
detail what is hidden behind acronyms like IAAS, PAAS, SAAS, and similar ‘‘X’’
As A Service family members.
Rosenblum and Garfinkel, ‘‘Virtual Machine Monitors: Current Technology and
Future Trends’’
Starting with a history of virtual machine monitors, this article then goes on to
discuss the current state of CPU, memory, and I/O virtualization. It covers problem
areas relating to all three and how future hardware may alleviate the problems.
Whitaker et al., ‘‘Rethinking the Design of Virtual Machine Monitors’’
Most computers have some bizarre and difficult to virtualize aspects. In this
paper, the authors of the Denali system argue for paravirtualization, that is,
