479
migrating processes running on a normal operating system. In the latter case, a fair
amount of critical state information about every process is kept in operating system
tables, including information relating to open files, alarms, signal handlers, and
more. When migrating a virtual machine, all that have to be moved are the memory
and disk images, since all the operating system tables move, too.
Another use for virtual machines is to run legacy applications on operating 
systems (or operating system versions) no longer supported or which do not work on
current hardware. These can run at the same time and on the same hardware as 
current applications. In fact, the ability to run at the same time applications that use
different operating systems is a big argument in favor of virtual machines.
Yet another important use of virtual machines is for software development. A
programmer who wants to make sure his software works on Windows 10, 
Windows 11, several versions of Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, and macOS,
among other systems no longer has to get a dozen computers and install different
operating systems on all of them. Instead, she merely creates a dozen virtual 
machines on a single computer and installs a different operating system on each one.
Of course, she could have partitioned the hard disk and installed a different 
operating system in each partition, but that approach is more difficult. First of all, 
standard PCs support only four primary disk partitions, no matter how big the disk is.
Second, although a multiboot program could be installed in the boot block, it
would be necessary to reboot the computer to work on a new operating system.
With virtual machines, all of them can run at once, since they are really just 
glorified processes.
Perhaps the most important and buzzword-compliant use case for virtualization
nowadays is found in the cloud. The key idea of a cloud is straightforward: 
outsource your computation or storage needs to a well-managed data center run by a
company specializing in this and staffed by experts in the area. Because the data
center typically belongs to someone else, you will probably have to pay for the use
of the resources, but at least you will not have to worry about the physical 
machines, power, cooling, and maintenance. Because the isolation offered by 
virtualization, cloud-providers can allow multiple clients, even competitors, to share a
single physical machine. Each client gets a piece of the pie. At the risk of 
stretching the cloud metaphor, we mention that early critics maintained that the pie was
only in the sky and that real organizations would not want to put their sensitive
data and computations on someone else’s resources. By now, howev er, virtualized
machines in the cloud are used by countless organization for countless 
applications, and while it may not be for all organizations and all data, there is no doubt
that cloud computing has been a tremendous success.
We mentioned that hypervisor-based virtualization allows administrators to run
multiple isolated operating systems on the same hardware. In case there is no need
for different operating systems, just multiple instances of the same one, there is an
alternative to hypervisors, known as OS-level virtualization. As the name 
indicates, it is the operating system that creates multiple virtual environments for user
