SEC. 10.7
SECURITY IN LINUX
793
the screen for standard error (file descriptor 2). Finally, it executes the preferred
shell, thus terminating itself.
At this point, the preferred shell is running with the correct UID and GID and
standard input, output, and error all set to their default devices. All processes that it
forks off (i.e., commands typed by the user) automatically inherit the shell’s UID
and GID, so they also will have the correct owner and group. All files they create
also get these values.
When any process attempts to open a file, the system first checks the 
protection bits in the file’s i-node against the caller’s effective UID and effective GID to
see if the access is permitted. If so, the file is opened and a file descriptor returned.
If not, the file is not opened and <1 is returned. No checks are made on subsequent
read or wr ite calls. As a consequence, if the protection mode changes after a file is
already open, the new mode will not affect processes that already have the file
open.
The Linux security model and its implementation are essentially the same as in
most other traditional UNIX systems.
10.8 ANDROID
Android is a relatively new operating system designed to run on mobile 
devices. It is based on the Linux kernel—Android introduces only a few new 
concepts to the Linux kernel itself, using most of the Linux facilities you are already
familiar with (processes, user IDs, virtual memory, file systems, scheduling, etc.)
in sometimes very different ways than they were originally intended.
Since its introduction in 2008, Android has grown to be the most widely used
operating systems in the world with, as of this writing, over 3 billion monthly
active users of just the Google flavor of Android alone. Its popularity has ridden
the explosion of smartphones, and it is freely available for manufacturers of mobile
devices to use in their products. It is also an open-source platform, making it 
customizable to a diverse variety of devices. It is popular not only for 
consumer-centric devices where its third-party application ecosystem is advantageous
(such as tablets, televisions, game systems, and media players), but is increasingly
used as the embedded OS for dedicated devices that need a graphical user interface
such as smart watches, automotive dashboards, airplane seatbacks, medical 
devices, and home appliances.
A large amount of the Android operating system is written in a high-level 
language, the Java programming language. The kernel and a large number of 
lowlevel libraries are written in C and C++. However, a large amount of the system is
written in Java and, but for some small exceptions, the entire application API is
written and published in Java as well. The parts of Android written in Java tend to
follow a very object-oriented design as encouraged by that language.
