466
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
recovery. This heuristic is applicable to resource deadlocks also and is relied upon
by users with buggy device drivers that can deadlock and freeze the system.
Of course, if the original message was not lost but the reply was simply 
delayed, the intended recipient may get the message two or more times, possibly with
undesirable consequences. Think about an electronic banking system in which the
message contains instructions to make a payment. Clearly, that should not be 
repeated (and executed) multiple times just because the network is slow or the 
timeout too short. Designing the communication rules, called the protocol, to get
ev erything right is a complex subject, but one far beyond the scope of this book.
Readers interested in network protocols might be interested in another book by one
of the authors, Computer Networks (Tanenbaum et al., 2020).
Not all deadlocks occurring in communication systems or networks are 
communication deadlocks. Resource deadlocks can also occur there. Consider, for 
example, the network of Fig. 6-18. It is a simplified view of the Internet. Very 
simplified. The Internet consists of two kinds of computers: hosts and routers. A host
is a user computer, either someone’s tablet or PC at home, a PC at a company, or a
corporate server. Hosts do work for people. A router is a specialized 
communications computer that moves packets of data from the source to the destination. Each
host is connected to one or more routers, either by a digital subscriber line, cable
TV connection, LAN, dial-up line, wireless network, optical fiber, or something
else.
A
B
D
C
Host
Host
Host
Host
Buffer
Router
Figure 6-18. A resource deadlock in a network.
When a packet comes into a router from one of its hosts, it is put into a buffer
for subsequent transmission to another router and then to another until it gets to the
destination. These buffers are resources and there are a finite number of them. In
Fig. 6-19, each router has only eight buffers (in practice they hav e millions, but
that does not change the nature of the potential deadlock, just its frequency). 
Suppose that all the packets at router A need to go to B and all the packets at B need to
go to C and all the packets at C need to go to D and all the packets at D need to go
to A. No packet can move because there is no buffer at the other end and we have a
classical resource deadlock, albeit in the middle of a communications system.
