408
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
program is prepared to handle. In this case it is interested in mouse clicks, 
keystrokes, and windows being uncovered. In practice, a real program would be 
interested in other events as well. Finally, the call to XMapRaised maps the new 
window onto the screen as the uppermost window. At this point, the window becomes
visible on the screen.
The main loop consists of two statements and is logically much simpler than
the corresponding loop in Windows. The first statement here gets an event and the
second one dispatches on the event type for processing. When some event indicates
that the program has finished, running is set to 0 and the loop terminates. Before
exiting, the program releases the graphic context, window, and connection.
It is worth mentioning that not everyone likes a GUI. Many programmers 
prefer a traditional command-line oriented interface of the type discussed in Sec. 5.6.1
above. X handles this via a client program called xterm. This program emulates a
venerable VT102 intelligent terminal, complete with all the escape sequences.
Thus editors such as vi and Emacs and other software that uses termcap work in
these windows without modification.
Graphical User Interfaces
Most personal computers offer a GUI (Graphical User Interface). The 
acronym GUI is pronounced ‘‘gooey.’’
The GUI was invented by Douglas Engelbart and his research group at the
Stanford Research Institute. It was then copied by researchers at Xerox PARC.
One fine day, Steve Jobs, cofounder of Apple, was touring PARC and saw a GUI
on a Xerox computer and said something to the effect of ‘‘Holy mackerel. This is
the future of computing.’’ The GUI gav e him the idea for a new computer, which
became the Apple Lisa. The Lisa was too expensive and was a commercial failure,
but its successor, the Macintosh, was a huge success.
When Microsoft got a Macintosh prototype so it could develop Microsoft
Office on it, it begged Apple to license the interface to all comers for a fee so it
would become the new industry standard. (Microsoft made much more money
from Office than from MS-DOS, so it was willing to abandon MS-DOS to have a
better platform for Office.) The Apple executive in charge of the Macintosh, 
JeanLouis Gasse´e, refused and Steve Jobs was no longer around to overrule him. 
Eventually, Microsoft got a license for elements of the interface. This formed the basis
of Windows. When Windows began to catch on, Apple sued Microsoft, claiming
Microsoft had exceeded the license, but the judge disagreed and Windows went on
to overtake the Macintosh. If Gasse´e had agreed with the many people within
Apple who also wanted to license the Macintosh software to everyone under the
sun, Apple would have become insanely rich on licensing fees alone and Windows
would not exist now. Of course, Apple has not done so badly since.
Leaving aside touch-enabled interfaces for the moment, a GUI has four 
essential elements, denoted by the characters WIMP. These letters stand for Windows,
