462
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
Nevertheless, there is a germ of an idea here that is frequently applicable.
Av oid assigning a resource unless absolutely necessary, and try to make sure that
as few processes as possible may actually claim the resource.
6.6.2 Attacking the Hold-and-Wait Condition
The second of the conditions stated by Coffman et al. looks slightly more
promising. If we can prevent processes that hold resources from waiting for more
resources, we can eliminate deadlocks. One way to achieve this goal is to require
all processes to request all their resources before starting execution. If ev erything
is available, the process will be allocated whatever it needs and can run to 
completion. If one or more resources are busy, nothing will be allocated and the process
will just wait.
An immediate problem with this approach is that many processes do not know
how many resources they will need until they hav e started running. In fact, if they
knew, the banker’s algorithm could be used. Another problem is that resources
will not be used optimally with this approach. Take, as an example, a process that
reads data from an input tape, analyzes it for an hour, and then writes an output
tape as well as plotting the results. If all resources must be requested in advance,
the process will tie up the output tape drive and the plotter for an hour.
Nevertheless, some mainframe batch systems require the user to list all the
resources on the first line of each job. The system then preallocates all resources
immediately and does not release them until they are no longer needed by the job
(or in the simplest case, until the job finishes). While this method puts a burden on
the programmer and wastes resources, it does prevent deadlocks.
A slightly different way to break the hold-and-wait condition is to require a
process requesting a resource to first temporarily release all the resources it 
currently holds. Then it tries to get everything it needs all at once.
6.6.3 Attacking the No-Preemption Condition
Attacking the third condition (no preemption) is also a possibility. If a process
has been assigned the printer and is in the middle of printing its output, forcibly
taking away the printer because a needed plotter is not available is tricky at best
and impossible at worst. However, some resources can be virtualized to avoid this
situation. Spooling printer output to the SSD or disk and allowing only the printer
daemon access to the real printer eliminates deadlocks involving the printer,
although it creates a potential for deadlock over disk space. With large SSDs/disks
though, running out of storage space is unlikely.
However, not all resources can be virtualized like this. For example, records in
databases or tables inside the operating system must be locked to be used and
therein lies the potential for deadlock.
