SEC. 1.2
HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
9
could afford the multimillion-dollar price tag. To run a job (i.e., a program or set
of programs), a programmer would first write the program on paper (in FORTRAN
or assembler), then punch it on cards. The programmer would then bring the card
deck down to the input room, hand it to one of the operators, and go drink coffee
until the output was ready.
When the computer finished whatever job it was currently running, an operator
would go over to the printer and tear off the output and carry it over to the output
room, so that the programmer could collect it later. Then the operator would take
one of the card decks that had been brought from the input room and read it in. If
the FORTRAN compiler was needed, the operator would have to get it from a file
cabinet and read it in. Much computer time was wasted while operators were 
walking around the machine room.
Given the high cost of the equipment, it is not surprising that people quickly
looked for ways to reduce the wasted time. The solution generally adopted was the
batch system. The idea behind it was to collect a tray full of jobs in the input
room and then read them onto a magnetic tape using a small (relatively) 
inexpensive computer, such as the IBM 1401, which was quite good at reading cards,
copying tapes, and printing output, but not at all good at numerical calculations.
Other, much more expensive machines, such as the IBM 7094, were used for the
real computing. This situation is shown in Fig. 1-3.
1401
7094
1401
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Card!
reader
Tape!
drive
Input!
tape
Output!
tape
System!
tape
Printer
Figure 1-3. An early batch system. (a) Programmers bring cards to 1401. (b)
1401 reads batch of jobs onto tape. (c) Operator carries input tape to 7094. (d)
7094 does computing. (e) Operator carries output tape to 1401. (f) 1401 prints
output.
After about an hour of collecting a batch of jobs, the cards were read onto a
magnetic tape, which was carried into the machine room, where it was mounted on
a tape drive. The operator then loaded a special program (the ancestor of today’s
operating system), which read the first job from tape and ran it. The output was
written onto a second tape, instead of being printed. After each job finished, the
operating system automatically read the next job from the tape and began running
it. When the whole batch was done, the operator removed the input and output
