434
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
33. A slight modification of the elevator algorithm for scheduling disk requests is to
always scan in the same direction. In what respect is this modified algorithm better
than the elevator algorithm?
34. Discuss the trade-off between on-shot mode and square-wav e mode of programmable
clock operation.
35. A personal computer salesman visiting a university in South-West Amsterdam 
remarked during his sales pitch that his company had devoted substantial effort to making
their version of UNIX very fast. As an example, he noted that their disk driver used
the elevator algorithm and also queued multiple requests within a cylinder in sector
order. A student, Harry Hacker, was impressed and bought one. He took it home and
wrote a program to randomly read 10,000 blocks spread across the disk. To his 
amazement, the performance that he measured was identical to what would be expected from
first-come, first-served. Was the salesman lying?
36. In the discussion of stable storage using nonvolatile RAM, the following point was
glossed over. What happens if the stable write completes but a crash occurs before the
operating system can write an invalid block number in the nonvolatile RAM? Does
this race condition ruin the abstraction of stable storage? Explain your answer.
37. In the discussion on stable storage, it was shown that the disk can be recovered to a
consistent state (a write either completes or does not take place at all) if a CPU crash
occurs during a write. Does this property hold if the CPU crashes again during a 
recovery procedure. Explain your answer.
38. In the discussion on stable storage, a key assumption is that a CPU crash that corrupts
a sector leads to an incorrect ECC. What problems might arise in the fiv e 
crash-recovery scenarios shown in Figure 5-27 if this assumption does not hold?
39. The clock interrupt handler on a certain computer requires 2 msec (including process
switching overhead) per clock tick. The clock runs at 60 Hz. What fraction of the CPU
is devoted to the clock?
40. A computer uses a programmable clock in square-wav e mode. If a 500 MHz crystal is
used, what should be the value of the holding register to achieve a clock resolution of
(a) a millisecond (a clock tick once every millisecond)?
(b) 100 microseconds?
41. A system simulates multiple clocks by chaining all pending clock requests together as
shown in Fig. 5-29. Suppose the current time is 5000 and there are pending clock
requests for time 5008, 5012, 5015, 5029, and 5037. Show the values of Clock header,
Current time, and Next signal at times 5000, 5005, and 5013. Suppose a new (pending)
signal arrives at time 5017 for 5033. Show the values of Clock header, Current time
and Next signal at time 5023.
42. Many versions of UNIX use an unsigned 32-bit integer to keep track of the time as the
number of seconds since the origin of time. When will these systems wrap around
(year and month)? Do you expect this to actually happen?
43. Consider the performance of a 56-kbps modem of yesteryear (which are still common
in rural areas without broadband). The driver outputs one character and then blocks.
