SEC. 13.1
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
1093
changing the guest operating systems to avoid using the bizarre features so that
they need not be emulated.
13.1.8 Multiple Processor Systems
Singh et al., ‘‘Jupiter Rising: A Decade of Clos Topologies and Centralized 
Control in Google’s Datacenter Network’’
Scaling computing and communication to the scale of large datacenters and
beyond is very challenging. How to do it, you can hear (or rather: read) from the
horse’s mouth in this article by Google’s engineers, where they describe their
Jupiter datacenter fabric.
Dreslinski et al., ‘‘Centip3De: A Many-Core Prototype Exploring 3D Integration
and Near-Threshold Computing’’
On a single CPU, things are also moving fast. In this dazzling story, the
authors explain how we can expand many cores by going beyond two dimensions.
Dubois et al., ‘‘Synchronization, Coherence, and Event Ordering in 
Multiprocessors’’
A tutorial on synchronization in shared-memory multiprocessor systems. 
Howev er, some of the ideas are equally applicable to single-processor and distributed
memory systems as well.
Nowatzki et al., ‘‘Heterogeneous Von Neumann/Dataflow Microprocessors’’
Where many multicore chips used for desktop computers were symmetric (all
the cores are identical), several modern architectures aim for heterogeneity: 
different cores packed on the same chip. In this article, the authors explain that it may be
beneficial to pack cores of a completely different nature on the same die.
Beaumont et al., ‘‘Scheduling on Two Types of Resources: A Survey’’
Of course, having different types of resources creates additional problems for
schedulers also. This survey presents different scheduling techniques for handling
such heterogeneous architectures.
13.1.9 Security
Anderson, Security Engineering, 3rd Ed
A wonderful book that explains very clearly how to build dependable and
secure systems by one of the best-known researchers in the field. Not only is this a
fascinating look at many aspects of security (including techniques, applications,
and organizational issues), it is also freely available online. No excuse for not 
reading it.
