SEC. 11.11
SECURITY IN WINDOWS
1021
used. The Groups field specifies the groups to which the process belongs. The
default DACL (Discretionary ACL) is the access control list assigned to objects
created by the process if no other ACL is specified. The user SID tells who owns
the process. The restricted SIDs are to allow untrustworthy processes to take part
in jobs with trustworthy processes but with less power to do damage.
Figure 11-55. Structure of an access token.
Finally, the privileges listed, if any, giv e the process special powers denied
ordinary users, such as the right to shut the machine down or access files to which
access would otherwise be denied. In effect, the privileges split up the power of
the superuser into several rights that can be assigned to processes individually. In
this way, a user can be given some superuser power, but not all of it. In summary,
the access token tells who owns the process and which defaults and powers are
associated with it.
When a user logs in, winlogon gives the initial process an access token. 
Subsequent processes normally inherit this token on down the line. A process’ access
token initially applies to all the threads in the process. However, a thread can
acquire a different access token during execution, in which case the thread’s access
token overrides the process’ access token. In particular, a client thread can pass its
access rights to a server thread to allow the server to access the client’s protected
files and other objects. This mechanism is called impersonation. It is 
implemented by the transport layers (i.e., ALPC, named pipes, and TCP/IP) and used by
RPC to communicate from clients to servers. The transports use internal interfaces
in the kernel’s security reference monitor component to extract the security context
for the current thread’s access token and ship it to the server side, where it is used
to construct a token which can be used by the server to impersonate the client.
Another basic concept is the security descriptor. Every object has a security
descriptor associated with it that tells who can perform which operations on it. The
security descriptors are specified when the objects are created. The NTFS file 
system and the registry maintain a persistent form of security descriptor, which is used
to create the security descriptor for File and Key objects (the object-manager
objects representing open instances of files and keys).
A security descriptor consists of a header followed by a DACL with one or
more ACEs (Access Control Entries). The two main kinds of elements are Allow
and Deny. An Allow element specifies an SID and a bitmap that specifies which
operations processes that SID may perform on the object. A Deny element works
the same way, except a match means the caller may not perform the operation. For
example, Ida has a file whose security descriptor specifies that everyone has read
access, Elvis has no access. Cathy has read/write access, and Ida herself has full
