70
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
and other nice features. Instead, they are exact copies of the bare hardware, 
including kernel/user mode, I/O, interrupts, and everything else the real machine has.
I/O instructions here
Trap here
Trap here
System calls here
Virtual 370s
CMS
CMS
CMS
VM/370
370 Bare hardware
Figure 1-28. The structure of VM/370 with CMS.
Because each virtual machine is identical to the true hardware, each one can
run any operating system that will run directly on the bare hardware. Different 
virtual machines can, and frequently do, run different operating systems. On the 
original IBM VM/370 system, some ran OS/360 or one of the other large batch or 
transaction-processing operating systems, while others ran a single-user, interactive
system called CMS (Conversational Monitor System) for interactive timesharing
users. The latter was popular with programmers.
When a CMS program executed a system call, the call was trapped to the 
operating system in its own virtual machine, not to VM/370, just as it would be were it
running on a real machine instead of a virtual one. CMS then issued the normal
hardware I/O instructions for reading its virtual disk or whatever was needed to
carry out the call. These I/O instructions were trapped by VM/370, which then 
performed them as part of its simulation of the real hardware. By completely 
separating the functions of multiprogramming and providing an extended machine, each
of the pieces could be much simpler, more flexible, and much easier to maintain.
In its modern incarnation, z/VM is usually used to run multiple complete 
operating systems rather than stripped-down single-user systems like CMS. For 
example, the zSeries is capable of running one or more Linux virtual machines along
with traditional IBM operating systems.
Virtual Machines Rediscovered
While IBM has had a virtual-machine product available for four decades, and a
few other companies, including Oracle and Hewlett-Packard, have recently added
virtual-machine support to their high-end enterprise servers, the idea of 
virtualization has largely been ignored in the PC world until recently. But in the past
decades, a combination of new needs, new software, and new technologies have
combined to make it a hot topic.
First the needs. Many companies have traditionally run their mail servers, Web
servers, FTP servers, and other servers on separate computers, sometimes with
