268
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
Attribute 
Meaning
Protection 
Who can access the file and in what way
Password 
Password needed to access the file
Creator 
ID of the person who created the file
Owner 
Current owner
Read-only flag
0 for read/write; 1 for read only
Hidden flag
0 for normal; 1 for do not display in listings
System flag
0 for normal files; 1 for system file
Archive flag 
0 for has been backed up; 1 for needs to be backed up
ASCII/binar y flag 
0 for ASCII file; 1 for binary file
Random access flag
0 for sequential access only; 1 for random access
Temporar y flag 
0 for nor mal; 1 for delete file on process exit
Lock flags 
0 for unlocked; nonzero for locked
Record length
Number of bytes in a record
Ke y position 
Offset of the key within each record
Ke y length 
Number of bytes in the key field
Creation time
Date and time the file was created
Time of last access
Date and time the file was last accessed
Time of last change
Date and time the file was last changed
Current size
Number of bytes in the file
Maximum size
Number of bytes the file may grow to
Figure 4-5. Some possible file attributes.
is a bit that keeps track of whether the file has been backed up recently. The 
backup program clears it, and the operating system sets it whenever a file is changed.
In this way, the backup program can tell which files need backing up. The 
temporary flag allows a file to be marked for automatic deletion when the process that
created it terminates.
The record-length, key-position, and key-length fields are only present in files
whose records can be looked up using a key. They provide the information required
to find the keys.
The times keep track of when the file was created, most recently accessed, and
most recently modified. These are useful for a variety of purposes. For example, a
source file that has been modified after the creation of the corresponding object file
needs to be recompiled. These fields provide the necessary information.
The current size tells how big the file is at present. Some old mainframe 
operating systems required the maximum size to be specified when the file was created,
in order to let the operating system reserve the maximum amount of storage in
advance. Personal-computer operating systems are thankfully clever enough to do
without this feature nowadays.
