SEC. 11.5
MEMORY MANAGEMENT
971
Pages are moved between the working sets and the various lists based on
actions taken by the processes themselves as well as the working-set manager and
other system threads. Let us examine the transitions. When the working-set 
manager removes pages from a working set, or when a process unmaps a file from its
address space, the removed pages goes on the bottom of the standby or modified
list, depending on its cleanliness. This transition is shown as (1) in Fig. 11-37.
Figure 11-37. The various page lists and the transitions between them.
Pages on both lists are still live pages, so if a page fault occurs and one of these
pages is needed, it is removed from the list and faulted back into the working set
without any disk I/O (2). When a process exits, its private pages are not live 
anymore, so they move to the free list regardless of whether they were in the working
set or on the modified or standby lists (3). Any pagefile space in use by the process
is also freed.
Other transitions are caused by other system threads. Every 4 seconds the 
balance set manager thread runs and looks for processes all of whose threads have
been idle for a certain number of seconds. If it finds any such processes, their 
kernel stacks are unpinned from physical memory and their pages are moved to the
standby or modified lists, also shown as (1).
Tw o other system threads, the mapped page writer and the modified page
writer, wake up periodically to see if there are enough clean pages. If not, they
take pages from the top of the modified list, write them back to disk, and then
move them to the standby list (4). The former handles writes to mapped files and
the latter handles writes to the pagefiles. The result of these writes is to transform
modified (dirty) pages into standby (clean) pages.
The reason for having two threads is that a mapped file might have to grow as
a result of the write, and growing it requires access to on-disk data structures to
allocate a free disk block. If there is no room in memory to bring them in when a
