SEC. 11.11
SECURITY IN WINDOWS
1035
before it gets to attack. Windows includes a full-featured antimalware package
called Windows Defender. This type of software hooks into kernel operations to
detect malware inside files, as well as recognize the behavioral patterns that are
used by specific instances (or general categories) of malware. These behaviors
include the techniques used to survive reboots, modify the registry to alter system
behavior, and launching particular processes and services needed to implement an
attack. Windows Defender provides a good protection against common malware
and similar software packages are also available from third-party providers.
11.12 SUMMARY
Kernel mode in Windows is structured in the HAL, the kernel and executive
layers of NTOS, and a large number of device drivers implementing everything
from device services to file systems and networking to graphics. The HAL hides
certain differences in hardware from the other components. The kernel layer 
manages the CPUs to support multithreading and synchronization, and the executive
implements most kernel-mode services.
The executive is based on kernel-mode objects that represent the key executive
data structures, including processes, threads, memory sections, drivers, devices,
and synchronization objects—to mention a few. User processes create objects by
calling system services and get back handle references which can be used in 
subsequent system calls to the executive components. The operating system also creates
objects internally. The object manager maintains a namespace into which objects
can be inserted for subsequent lookup.
The most important objects in Windows are processes, threads, and sections.
Processes have virtual address spaces and are containers for resources. Threads are
the unit of execution and are scheduled by the kernel layer using a priority 
algorithm in which the highest-priority ready thread always runs, preempting 
lower-priority threads as necessary. Sections represent memory objects, like files, that can
be mapped into the address spaces of processes. EXE and DLL program images
are represented as sections, as is shared memory.
Windows supports demand-paged virtual memory. The paging algorithm is
based on the working-set concept. The system maintains several types of page lists,
to optimize the use of memory. The various page lists are fed by trimming the
working sets using complex formulas that try to reuse physical pages that have not
been referenced in a long time. The cache manager manages virtual addresses in
the kernel that can be used to map files into memory, dramatically improving I/O
performance for many applications because read operations can be satisfied 
without accessing the disk.
I/O is performed by device drivers, which follow the Windows Driver Model.
Each driver starts out by initializing a driver object that contains the addresses of
the procedures that the system can call to manipulate devices. The actual devices
