SEC. 10.1
HISTORY OF UNIX AND LINUX
711
roughly similar to MINIX version in size and also comparable in functionality. De
facto, it was a rewrite of MINIX, the only system Torvalds had source code for.
Linux rapidly grew in size and evolved into a full, production UNIX clone, as
virtual memory, a more sophisticated file system, and many other features were
added. Although it originally ran only on the 386 (and even had embedded 386
assembly code in the middle of C procedures), it was quickly ported to other 
platforms and now runs on a wide variety of machines, just as UNIX does. One 
difference with UNIX does stand out, however: Linux makes use of so many special
features of the gcc compiler and would need a lot of work before it would compile
with an ANSI standard C compiler. The shortsighted idea that gcc is the only 
compiler the world will ever see is already becoming a problem because the 
opensource LLVM compiler from the University of Illinois is rapidly gaining many
adherents due to its flexibility and code quality. Since LLVM did not support all
the nonstandard gcc extensions to C, it could not compile the Linux kernel without
a lot of patches to the kernel to replace non-ANSI code when it was released.
LLVM eventually supported some of the gcc extensions.
The next major release of Linux was version 1.0, issued in 1994. It was about
165,000 lines of code and included a new file system, memory-mapped files, and
BSD-compatible networking with sockets and TCP/IP. It also included many new
device drivers. Several minor revisions followed in the next two years.
By this time, Linux was sufficiently compatible with UNIX that a vast amount
of UNIX software was ported to Linux, making it far more useful than it would
have otherwise been. In addition, a large number of people were attracted to Linux
and began working on the code and extending it in many ways under Torvalds’
general supervision.
The next major release, 2.0, was made in 1996. It consisted of about 470,000
lines of C and 8000 lines of assembly code. It included support for 64-bit 
architectures, symmetric multiprogramming, new networking protocols, and numerous
other features. A large fraction of the total code mass was taken up by an extensive
collection of device drivers for an ever-growing set of supported peripherals. 
Additional releases followed frequently.
The version numbers of the Linux kernel consist of four numbers, A.B.C.D,
such as 2.6.9.11. The first number denotes the kernel version. The second number
denotes the major revision. Prior to the 2.6 kernel, even revision numbers 
corresponded to stable kernel releases, whereas odd ones corresponded to unstable 
revisions, under development. With the 2.6 kernel, that is no longer the case. The third
number corresponds to minor revisions, such as support for new drivers. The fourth
number corresponds to minor bug fixes or security patches. In July 2011, Linus
Torvalds announced the release of Linux 3.0, not in response to major technical
advances, but rather in honor of the 20th anniversary of the kernel. By early 2021,
Linux 5.11 kernel version was released with over 30 million lines of code.
A large amount of standard UNIX software has been ported to Linux, 
including the popular X Window System and a great deal of networking software. Two
