SEC. 11.7
INPUT/OUTPUT IN WINDOWS
987
Kernel buffer address
MDL
Thread
IRP Driver-Stack Data
Completion/cancel info
Thread’s IRP chain link
Memory descr list head
User buffer address
Buffer pointers
Flags
MDL
Next IRP
Completion
APC block
Driver
queuing
& comm.
Operation code
Figure 11-42. The major fields of an I/O Request Packet.
Device Stacks
A driver in Windows may do all the work by itself, or drivers may also be
stacked, which means that a request may pass through a sequence of drivers, each
doing part of the work. Two stacked drivers are also illustrated in Fig. 11-43.
One common use for stacked drivers is to separate the bus management from
the functional work of controlling the device. Bus management on the PCI bus is
quite complicated on account of many kinds of modes and bus transactions. By
separating this work from the device-specific part, driver writers are freed from
learning how to control the bus. They can just use the standard bus driver in their
stack. Similarly, USB and SCSI drivers have a device-specific part and a generic
part, with common drivers being supplied by Windows for the generic part.
Another use of stacking drivers is to be able to insert filter drivers into the
stack. We hav e already looked at the use of file-system filter drivers, which are
inserted above the file system. Filter drivers are also used for managing physical
hardware. A filter driver performs some transformation on the operations as the
IRP flows down the device stack, as well as during the completion operation with
the IRP flows back up through the completion routines each driver specified. For
example, a filter driver could compress data on the way to the disk or encrypt data
on the way to the network. Putting the filter here means that neither the application
program nor the true device driver has to be aware of it, and it works automatically
for all data going to (or coming from) the device.
Kernel-mode device drivers are a serious problem for the reliability and 
stability of Windows. Most of the kernel crashes in Windows are due to bugs in device
