SEC. 2.1
PROCESSES
95
Process management 
Memory management 
File management
Registers 
Pointer to text segment info
Root directory
Program counter 
Pointer to data segment info
Wor king director y
Program status word 
Pointer to stack segment info
File descriptors
Stack pointer 
User ID
Process state
Group ID
Pr ior ity
Scheduling parameters
Process ID
Parent process
Process group
Signals
Time when process started
CPU time used
Children’s CPU time
Time of next alarm
Figure 2-4. Some of the fields of a typical process-table entry.
All interrupts start by saving the registers, often in the process table entry for
the current process. Then the information pushed onto the stack by the interrupt is
removed and the stack pointer is set to point to a temporary stack used by the 
process handler. Actions such as saving the registers and setting the stack pointer 
cannot even be expressed in high-level languages such as C, so they are performed by
a small assembly-language routine, usually the same one for all interrupts since the
work of saving the registers is identical, no matter the cause of the interrupt.
When this routine is finished, it calls a C procedure to do the rest of the work
for this specific interrupt type. (We assume the operating system is written in C,
the usual choice for all operating systems used in production.) When it has done
its job, possibly making some process now ready, the scheduler is called to see
what to run next. After that, control is passed back to the assembly-language code
to load up the registers and memory map for the now-current process and start it
running. Interrupt handling and scheduling are summarized in Fig. 2-5. It is worth
noting that the details vary somewhat from system to system.
A process may be interrupted thousands of times during its execution, but the
key idea is that after each interrupt the interrupted process returns to precisely the
same state it was in before the interrupt occurred.
2.1.7 Modeling Multiprogramming
When multiprogramming is used, the CPU utilization can be improved.
Crudely put, if the average process computes only 20% of the time it is sitting in
memory, then with fiv e processes in memory at once the CPU should be busy all
the time. This model is unrealistically optimistic, however, since it tacitly assumes
that all fiv e processes will never be waiting for I/O at the same time.
