586
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
For some applications, the delays introduced by acknowledgements are 
unacceptable. One such application is digitized voice traffic. It is preferable for 
telephone users to hear a bit of noise on the line or a garbled word from time to time
than to introduce a delay to wait for acknowledgements.
Not all applications require connections. For example, to test the network, all
that is needed is a way to send a single packet that has a high probability of arrival,
but no guarantee. Unreliable (meaning not acknowledged) connectionless service
is often called datagram service, in analogy with telegram service, which also
does not provide an acknowledgement back to the sender.
In other situations, the convenience of not having to establish a connection to
send one short message is desired, but reliability is essential. The acknowledged
datagram service can be provided for these applications. It is like sending a 
registered letter and requesting a return receipt. When the receipt comes back, the 
sender is absolutely sure that the letter was delivered to the intended party and not lost
along the way.
Still another service is the request-reply service. In this service, the sender
transmits a single datagram containing a request; the reply contains the answer. For
example, a query to the local library asking where Uighur is spoken falls into this
category. Request-reply is commonly used to implement communication in the 
client-server model: the client issues a request and the server responds to it. Figure
8-30 summarizes the types of services we have discussed.
Service
Reliable message stream
Reliable byte stream
Unreliable connection
Unreliable datagram
Acknowledged datagram
Request-reply
Example
Sequence of pages of a book
Remote login
Digitized voice
Network test packets
Registered mail
Database query
Connection-oriented
Connectionless
Figure 8-30. Six different types of network service.
Network Protocols
All networks have highly specialized rules for what messages may be sent and
what responses may be returned in response to these messages. For example, under
certain circumstances (e.g., file transfer), when a message is sent from a source to a
destination, the destination is required to send an acknowledgement back 
indicating correct receipt of the message. Under other circumstances (e.g., digital 
telephony), no such acknowledgement is expected. The set of rules by which particular
