CHAP. 5  
PROBLEMS
435
When the character has been printed, an interrupt occurs and a message is sent to the
blocked driver, which outputs the next character and then blocks again. If the time to
pass a message, output a character, and block is 100 µsec, what fraction of the CPU is
eaten by the modem handling? Assume that each character has one start bit and one
stop bit, for 10 bits in all.
44. A smartphone screen contains 720 × 1280 pixels. To scroll a full screen of text, the
CPU (or controller) must move all the lines of text upward by copying their bits from
one part of the video RAM to another. A character’s box is 16 pixels wide by 32 pixels
high (including intercharacter and interline spacing), Each pixel is 24 bits. How many
characters fit on the screen? How long does it take to scroll the whole screen at a
copying rate of 5 nsec per byte assuming there is no hardware assistance? What is the
scrolling speed in lines/sec?
45. A bitmap screen contains 1600 by 1200 pixels with 24 bits/pixel. To scroll a window,
the CPU (or controller) must move all the lines of text upward by copying their bits
from one part of the video RAM to another. If a particular window is 80 characters
wide by 60 lines high and a character’s box is 8 pixels wide by 16 pixels high, how
long does it take to scroll the whole window at a copying rate of 5 nsec per byte? How
many lines/sec can be scrolled?
46. After receiving a DEL (SIGINT) character, the display driver discards all output 
currently queued for that display. Why?
47. A user issues a command to an editor to delete the word on line 5 occupying character
positions 7 through and including 12. Assuming the cursor is not on line 5 when the
command is given, what ANSI escape sequence should the editor emit to delete the
word?
48. On the original IBM PC’s color display, writing to the video RAM at any time other
than during the CRT beam’s vertical retrace caused ugly spots to appear all over the
screen. A screen image is 25 by 80 characters, each of which fits in a box 8 pixels by 8
pixels. Each row of 640 pixels is drawn on a single horizontal scan of the beam, which
takes 63.6 µsec, including the horizontal retrace. The screen is redrawn 60 times a 
second, each of which requires a vertical retrace period to get the beam back to the top.
What fraction of the time is the video RAM available for writing in?
49. The designers of a computer system expected that the mouse could be moved at a 
maximum rate of 20 cm/sec. If a mickey is 0.1 mm and each mouse message is 3 bytes,
what is the maximum data rate of the mouse assuming that each mickey is reported
separately?
50. The primary additive colors are red, green, and blue, which means that any color can
be constructed from a linear superposition of these colors. Is it possible that someone
could have a color photograph that cannot be represented using full 24-bit color?
51. One way to place a character on a bitmapped screen is to use BitBlt from a font table.
Assume that a particular font uses characters that are 16 × 24 pixels in true RGB color.
(a) How much font table space does each character take?
(b) If copying a byte takes 100 nsec, including overhead, what is the output rate to the
screen in characters/sec?
