608
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
refer to the overall problem, and the term protection domain to indicate the exact
set of operations (such reading or writing a file or memory page) a user or process
is permitted to perform on the objects in the system. Moreover, we will use 
security mechanism to refer to a specific technique used by the operating system to
safeguard information in the computer. An example of a security mechanism is 
setting the supervisor bit in a pagetable entry of a page that should be inaccessible to
user applications. Finally, we will use the term security domain in an informal
way to refer to software that, on the one hand, needs to be able to perform its tasks
securely, and on the other hand, needs to be prevented from jeopardizing the 
security of others. Examples of security domains include the components of the 
operating system kernel, processes and virtual machines. If we zoom in enough, we see
that the notion of security domain is simply a convenient way to point at particular
software. However, from a security point of view, all that is relevant about a 
security domain is defined by its protection domain.
9.1.1 The CIA Security Triad
Many security texts decompose the security of an information system in three
components: confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Together, they are often
referred to as ‘‘CIA.’’ They are shown in Fig. 9-1 and constitute the core security
properties that we must protect against attackers and eavesdroppers—such as the
(other) CIA.
The first, confidentiality, is concerned with having secret data remain secret.
More specifically, if the owner of some data has decided that these data are to be
made available only to certain people and no others, the system should guarantee
that release of the data to unauthorized people never occurs. As an absolute 
minimum, the owner should be able to specify who can see what, and the system
should enforce these specifications, which ideally should be per file.
Goal 
Threat
Confidentiality 
Exposure of data
Integrity 
Tamper ing with data
Av ailability 
Denial of service
Figure 9-1. Security goals and threats.
The second property, integrity, means that unauthorized users should not be
able to modify any data without the owner’s permission. Data modification in this
context includes not only changing the data, but also removing data and adding
false data. If a system cannot guarantee that data deposited in it remain unchanged
until the owner decides to change them, it is not worth much for data storage.
The third property, av ailability, means that nobody can disturb the system to
make it unusable. Such denial-of-service attacks are increasingly common. For
