602
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
14. Affinity scheduling reduces cache misses. Does it also reduce TLB misses? What
about page faults?
15. For each of the topologies of Fig. 8-16, what is the diameter of the interconnection 
network? Count all hops (host-router and router-router) equally for this problem.
16. Consider the double-torus topology of Fig. 8-16(d) but expanded to size k × k. What
is the diameter of the network? (Hint: Consider odd k and even k differently.)
17. The bisection bandwidth of an interconnection network is often used as a measure of
its capacity. It is computed by removing a minimal number of links that splits the 
network into two equal-size units. The capacity of the removed links is then added up. If
there are many ways to make the split, the one with the minimum bandwidth is the
bisection bandwidth. For an interconnection network consisting of an 8 × 8 × 8 cube,
what is the bisection bandwidth if each link is 1 Gbps?
18. Consider a multicomputer in which the network interface is in user mode, so only three
copies are needed from source RAM to destination RAM. Assume that moving a
32-bit word to or from the network interface board takes 20 nsec and that the network
itself operates at 1 Gbps. What would the delay be for a 64-byte packet being sent from
source to destination if we could ignore the copying time? What is it with the copying
time? Now consider the case where two extra copies are needed, to the kernel on the
sending side and from the kernel on the receiving side. What is the delay in this case?
19. Repeat the previous problem for both the three-copy case and the fiv e-copy case, but
this time compute the bandwidth rather than the delay.
20. When transferring data from RAM to a network interface, pinning a page can be used,
but suppose that system calls to pin and unpin pages each take 1 µsec. Copying takes 5
bytes/nsec using DMA but 20 nsec per byte using programmed I/O. How big does a
packet have to be before pinning the page and using DMA is worth it?
21. When a procedure is scooped up from one machine and placed on another to be called
by RPC, some problems can occur. In the text, we pointed out four of these: pointers,
unknown array sizes, unknown parameter types, and global variables. An issue not
discussed is what happens if the (remote) procedure executes a system call. What 
problems might that cause and what might be done to handle them?
22. In a DSM system, when a page fault occurs, the needed page has to be located. List
two possible ways to find the page.
23. Consider the processor allocation of Fig. 8-24. Suppose that process H is moved from
node 2 to node 3. What is the total weight of the external traffic now?
24. Some multicomputers allow running processes to be migrated from one node to 
another. Is it sufficient to stop a process, freeze its memory image, and just ship that off to a
different node? Name two hard problems that have to be solved to make this work.
25. Why is there a limit to cable length on an Ethernet network?
26. In Fig. 8-27, the third and fourth layers are labeled Middleware and Application on all
four machines. In what sense are they all the same across platforms, and in what sense
are they different?
