830
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
1. A share request that includes the URI of the data to be shared is 
created and is submitted to the system.
2. The system asks the ContentResolver for the MIME type of the data
behind that URI; this works much like the query method we just 
discussed, but asks the content provider to return a MIME-type string for
the URI.
3. The system finds all activities that can receive data of the identified
MIME type.
4. A user interface is shown for the user to select one of the possible
recipients.
5. When one of these activities is selected, the system launches it.
6. The share-handling activity receives the URI of the data to be shared,
retrieves its data through ContentResolver, and performs its 
appropriate operation: creates an email, stores it, etc.
10.8.9 Intents
A detail that we have not yet discussed in the application manifest shown in
Fig. 10-51 is the <intent-filter> tags included with the activity and receiver 
declarations. This is part of the intent feature in Android, which is the cornerstone for
how different applications identify each other in order to be able to interact and
work together.
An intent is the mechanism Android uses to discover and identify activities,
receivers, and services. It is similar in some ways to the Linux shell’s search path,
which the shell uses to look through multiple possible directories in order to find
an executable matching command names given to it.
There are two major types of intents: explicit and implicit. An explicit intent
is one that directly identifies a single specific application component; in Linux
shell terms it is the equivalent to supplying an absolute path to a command. The
most important part of such an intent is a pair of strings naming the component: the
package name of the target application and class name of the component within
that application. Now referring back to the activity of Fig. 10-52 in application
Fig. 10-51, an explicit intent for this component would be one with package name
com.example.email and class name com.example.email.MailMainActivity.
The package and class name of an explicit intent are enough information to
uniquely identify a target component, such as the main email activity in Fig. 10-52.
From the package name, the package manager can return everything needed about
the application, such as where to find its code. From the class name, we know
which part of that code to execute.
