SEC. 10.6
THE LINUX FILE SYSTEM
785
The first NFS protocol handles mounting. A client can send a path name to a
server and request permission to mount that directory somewhere in its directory
hierarchy. The place where it is to be mounted is not contained in the message, as
the server does not care where it is to be mounted. If the path name is legal and the
directory specified has been exported, the server returns a file handle to the client.
The file handle contains fields uniquely identifying the file-system type, the disk,
the i-node number of the directory, and security information. Subsequent calls to
read and write files in the mounted directory or any of its subdirectories use the file
handle. It is somewhat analogous to the file descriptors returned by the creat and
open calls on local files.
When Linux boots, it runs the /etc/rc shell script before going multiuser. 
Commands to mount remote file systems can be placed in this script, thus automatically
mounting the necessary remote file systems before allowing any logins. 
Alternatively, most versions of Linux also support automounting. This feature allows a
set of remote directories to be associated with a local directory. None of these
remote directories are mounted (or their servers even contacted) when the client is
booted. Instead, the first time a remote file is opened, the operating system sends a
message to each of the servers. The first one to reply wins, and its directory is
mounted.
Automounting has two principal advantages over static mounting via the
/etc/rc file. First, if one of the NFS servers named in /etc/rc happens to be down, it
is impossible to bring the client up, at least not without some difficulty, delay, and
quite a few error messages. If the user does not even need that server at the
moment, all that work is wasted. Second, by allowing the client to try a set of 
servers in parallel, a degree of fault tolerance can be achieved (because only one of
them needs to be up), and the performance can be improved (by choosing the first
one to reply—presumably the least heavily loaded).
On the other hand, it is tacitly assumed that all the file systems specified as
alternatives for the automount are identical. Since NFS provides no support for file
or directory replication, it is up to the user to arrange for all the file systems to be
the same. Consequently, automounting is most often used for read-only file 
systems containing system binaries and other files that rarely change.
The second NFS protocol is for directory and file access. Clients can send
messages to servers to manipulate directories and read and write files. They can
also access file attributes, such as file mode, size, and time of last modification.
Most Linux system calls are supported by NFS, with the perhaps surprising 
exceptions of open and close.
The omission of open and close is not an accident. It is fully intentional. It is
not necessary to open a file before reading it, nor to close it when done. Instead, to
read a file, a client sends the server a lookup message containing the file name,
with a request to look it up and return a file handle, which is a structure that 
identifies the file (i.e., contains a file system identifier and i-node number, among other
data). Unlike an open call, this lookup operation does not copy any information
