100
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
An analogous situation exists with many other interactive programs. For 
example, an electronic spreadsheet is a program that allows a user to maintain a matrix,
some of whose elements are data provided by the user. Other elements are 
computed based on the input data using potentially complex formulas. A spreadsheet
that computes the predicted annual profit of a substantial company might have 
hundreds of pages and thousands of complex formulas based on hundreds of input
variables. When a user changes one input variable, many cells may have to be
recomputed. By having a background thread do the recomputation, the interactive
thread can allow the user to make additional changes while the computation is
going on. Similarly, a third thread can handle periodic backups to disk on its own.
Now consider yet another example of where threads can be useful: a server for
a Website. Requests for pages come in and the requested page is sent back to the
client. At most Websites, some pages are more commonly accessed than other
pages. For example, Samsung’s home page is accessed far more than a page deep
in the tree containing the detailed technical specifications of any smartphone 
model. Web servers use this fact to improve performance by maintaining a collection
of heavily used pages in main memory to eliminate the need to go to disk to get
them. Such a collection is called a cache and is used in many other contexts as
well. We saw CPU caches in Chap. 1, for example.
One way to organize the Web server is shown in Fig. 2-8(a). Here one thread,
the dispatcher, reads incoming requests for work from the network. After 
examining the request, it chooses an idle (i.e., blocked) worker thread and hands it the
request, possibly by writing a pointer to the message into a special word associated
with each thread. The dispatcher then wakes up the sleeping worker, moving it
from blocked state to ready state.
Dispatcher thread
Worker thread
Web page cache
Kernel
Network!
connection
Web server process
User!
space
Kernel!
space
Figure 2-8. A multithreaded Web server.
When the worker wakes up, it checks to see if the request can be satisfied from
the Web page cache, to which all threads have access. If not, it starts a read
