958
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
Virtual Address Allocation
Each page of virtual addresses can be in one of three states: invalid, reserved,
or committed. An invalid page is not currently mapped to a memory section object
and a reference to it causes a page fault that results in an access violation. Once
code or data is mapped onto a virtual page, the page is said to be committed. A
committed page does not necessarily have a physical page allocated for it, but the
operating system has ensured that a physical page is guaranteed to be available
when necessary. A page fault on a committed page results in mapping the page
containing the virtual address that caused the fault onto one of the pages 
represented by the section object or stored in the pagefile. Often this will require 
allocating a physical page and performing I/O on the file represented by the section object
to read in the data from disk. But page faults can also occur simply because the
page table entry needs to be updated, as the physical page referenced is still cached
in memory, in which case I/O is not required. These are called soft faults. We will
discuss them in more detail shortly.
A virtual page can also be in the reserved state. A reserved virtual page is
invalid but has the property that those virtual addresses will never be allocated by
the memory manager for another purpose. As an example, when a new thread is
created, many pages of user-mode stack space are reserved in the process’ virtual
address space, but only one page is committed. As the stack grows, the virtual
memory manager will automatically commit additional pages under the covers,
until the reservation is almost exhausted. The reserved pages function as guard
pages to keep the stack from growing too far and overwriting other process data.
Reserving all the virtual pages means that the stack can eventually grow to its 
maximum size without the risk that some of the contiguous pages of virtual address
space needed for the stack might be given away for another purpose. In addition to
the invalid, reserved, and committed attributes, pages also have other attributes,
such as being readable, writable, and executable.
Pagefiles
An interesting trade-off occurs with assignment of backing store to committed
pages that are not being mapped to specific files. These pages use the pagefile.
The question is how and when to map the virtual page to a specific location in the
pagefile. A simple strategy would be to assign each virtual page to a page in one of
the paging files on disk at the time the virtual page was committed. This would
guarantee that there was always a known place to write out each committed page
should it be necessary to evict it from memory, but it would require a much larger
pagefile than necessary and would not be able to support small pagefiles.
Windows uses a just-in-time strategy. Committed pages that are backed by the
pagefile are not assigned space in the pagefile until the time that they hav e to be
paged out. The memory manager maintains a system-wide commit limit which is
