CHAP. 11
PROBLEMS
1039
34. A file has the following mapping. Give the MFT run entries.
Offset 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10
Disk address
50 51 52 22 24 25 26 53 
54
60
35. Consider the MFT record of Fig. 11-46. Suppose that the file grew and a 10th block
was assigned to the end of the file. The number of this block is 66. What would the
MFT record look like now?
36. In Fig. 11-49(b), the first two runs are each of length 8 blocks. Is it just an accident
that they are equal, or does this have to do with the way compression works? Explain
your answer.
37. Suppose that you wanted to build Windows Lite. Which of the fields of Fig. 11-55
could be removed without weakening the security of the system?
38. The mitigation strategy for improving security despite the continuing presence of 
vulnerabilities has been very successful. Modern attacks are very sophisticated, often
requiring the presence of multiple vulnerabilities to build a reliable exploit. One of the
vulnerabilities that is usually required is an information leak. Explain how an 
information leak can be used to defeat address-space randomization in order to launch an
attack based on return-oriented programming.
39. An extension model used by many programs (Web browsers, Office, COM servers)
involves hosting DLLs to hook and extend their underlying functionality. Is this a 
reasonable model for an RPC-based service to use as long as it is careful to impersonate
clients before loading the DLL? Why not?
40. When running on a NUMA machine, whenever the Windows memory manager needs
to allocate a physical page to handle a page fault it attempts to use a page from the
NUMA node for the current thread’s ideal processor. Why? What if the thread is 
currently running on a different processor?
41. Give a couple of examples where an application might be able to recover easily from a
backup based on a volume shadow copy rather the state of the disk after a system
crash.
42. In Sec. 11.10, providing new memory to the process heap was mentioned as one of the
scenarios that require a supply of zeroed pages in order to satisfy security 
requirements. Give one or more other examples of virtual memory operations that require
zeroed pages.
43. Windows contains a hypervisor which allows multiple operating systems to run 
simultaneously. This is available on clients, but is far more important in cloud computing.
When a security update is applied to a guest operating system, it is not much different
than patching a server. Howev er, when a security update is applied to the root 
operating system, this can be a big problem for the users of cloud computing. What is the
nature of the problem? What can be done about it?
44. Does hotpatching break CFG guarantees by introducing new indirect jumps?
45. The regedit command can be used to export part or all of the registry to a text file
under all current versions of Windows. Save the registry several times during a work
session and see what changes. If you have access to a Windows computer on which
