SEC. 11.4
PROCESSES AND THREADS IN WINDOWS
935
security is configured for the process and first thread, debugger configuration, and
scheduling priorities. A flag also specifies whether open handles in the creator are
to be passed to the new process. The function also takes the current working 
directory for the new process and an optional data structure with information about the
GUI Window the process is to use. Rather than returning just a process ID for the
new process, Win32 returns both handles and IDs, both for the new process and for
its initial thread.
The large number of parameters reveals a number of differences from the
design of process creation in UNIX.
1. The actual search path for finding the program to execute is buried in
the library code for Win32, but managed more explicitly in UNIX.
2. The current working directory is a kernel-mode concept in UNIX but
a user-mode string in Windows. Windows does open a handle on the
current directory for each process, with the same annoying effect as in
UNIX: you cannot delete the directory, unless it happens to be across
the network, in which case you can delete it.
3. UNIX parses the command line and passes an array of parameters,
while Win32 leaves argument parsing up to the individual program.
As a consequence, different programs may handle wildcards (e.g.,
*.txt) and other special symbols in an inconsistent way.
4. Whether file descriptors can be inherited in UNIX is a property of the
handle. In Windows, it is a property of both the handle and a 
parameter to process creation.
5. Win32 is GUI oriented, so new processes are directly passed 
information about their primary window, while this information is passed
as parameters to GUI applications in UNIX.
6. Windows does not have a SETUID bit as a property of the executable,
but one process can create a process that runs as a different user, as
long as it can obtain a token with that user’s credentials.
7. The process and thread handle returned from Windows can be used at
any time to modify the new process/thread in many ways, including
modifying the virtual memory, injecting threads into the process, and
altering the execution of threads. UNIX makes modifications to the
new process only between the fork and exec calls, and only in limited
ways as exec throws out all the user-mode state of the process.
Some of these differences are historical and philosophical.
UNIX was
designed to be command-line oriented rather than GUI oriented like Windows.
UNIX users are more sophisticated, and they understand concepts like PA TH 
variables. Windows inherited a lot of legacy from MS-DOS.
