216
MEMORY MANAGEMENT 
CHAP. 3
w(k,t)
k
Figure 3-18. The working set is the set of pages used by the k most recent 
memory references. The function w(k, t) is the size of the working set at time t.
immediately leads to a possible page replacement algorithm: when a page fault
occurs, find a page not in the working set and evict it. To implement such an 
algorithm, we need a precise way of determining which pages are in the working set.
By definition, the working set is the set of pages used in the k most recent memory
references (some authors use the k most recent page references, but the choice is
arbitrary). To implement any working set algorithm, some value of k must be 
chosen in advance. Then, after every memory reference, the set of pages used by the
most recent k memory references is uniquely determined.
Of course, having an operational definition of the working set does not mean
that there is an efficient way to compute it during program execution. One could
imagine a shift register of length k, with every memory reference shifting the 
register left one position and inserting the most recently referenced page number on the
right. The set of all k page numbers in the shift register would be the working set.
In theory, at a page fault, the contents of the shift register could be read out and
sorted. Duplicate pages could then be removed. The result would be the working
set. However, maintaining the shift register and processing it at a page fault would
both be prohibitively expensive, so this technique is never used.
Instead, various approximations are used. One common approximation is to
drop the idea of counting back k memory references and use execution time
instead. For example, instead of defining the working set as those pages used 
during the previous 10 million memory references, we can define it as the set of pages
used during the past 100 msec of execution. In practice, such a definition is just as
good and easier to work with. Note that for each process, only its own execution
time counts. Thus if a process starts running at time T and has had 40 msec of
CPU time at real time T + 100 msec, for working set purposes its time is 40 msec.
The amount of CPU time a process has actually used since it started is often called
its current virtual time. With this approximation, the working set of a process is
the set of pages it has referenced during the past o seconds of virtual time.
