SEC. 11.3
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
911
C: File-system Filter 
C: File-system Filter
C: File system 
C: Volume
C: Disk class device
C: Disk partition(s)
IRP
File-system filter driver 
File-system filter driver 
NTFS driver 
Volume manager driver 
Disk class driver 
Disk miniport driver 
D: File-system filter
D: File-system filter
D: File system
D: Volume
D: Disk class device
D: Disk partition(s)
IRP
Device stack
consisting of device
objects for C:
Device stack
consisting of device
objects for D:
Each device object
links to a driver
object with function
entry points
I/O manager
Figure 11-14. Simplified depiction of device stacks for two NTFS file volumes.
The I/O request packet is passed from down the stack. The appropriate routines
from the associated drivers are called at each level in the stack. The device stacks
themselves consist of device objects allocated specifically to each stack.
nonvolatile CMOS memory that is initialized by the computer manufacturer (and
sometimes updated by the user, in a process called flashing). Because the software
persists in (read-only) memory, and is only rarely updated, it is referred to as
firmware. It is held in a special chip whose contents are not lost when power is
turned off. The firmware is loaded on PCs by the manufacturer of either the 
motherboard or the computer system. Historically, PC firmware was a program called
BIOS (Basic Input/Output System), but most new computers use UEFI (Unified
Extensible Firmware Interface). UEFI improves over BIOS by supporting 
modern hardware, providing a more modular CPU-independent architecture, much
improved security mechanisms and supporting an extension model which 
simplifies booting over networks, provisioning new machines, and running diagnostics.
Windows 11 supports only UEFI-based machines.
The main purpose of any firmware is to bring up the operating system by 
locating and running the bootstrap application. UEFI firmware achieves this by first
requiring that the boot disk be formatted in the GPT (GUID partition table)
scheme where each disk partition is identified by a GUID (Globally-Unique
