SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
827
Activity manager in system_server process
Email app process
2. Create
3. Return
4. Send
1. Bind
Client app process
5. Call service
SyncService
IBinder
IBinder
IBinder
IBinder
IBinder
ServiceRecord
(SyncService)
STOPPED
Figure 10-59. Binding to an application service.
Receivers
A receiver is the recipient of (typically external) event s that happen, most of
the time in the background and outside of normal user interaction with an app.
Receivers conceptually are the same as an application explicitly registering for a
callback when something interesting happens (an alarm goes off, data connectivity
changes, etc.), but do not require that the application be running in order to receive
the event.
The example email manifest shown in Fig. 10-51 contains a receiver for the
application to find out when the device’s storage becomes low in order for it to
stop synchronizing email (which may consume more storage). When the device’s
storage becomes low, the system will send a broadcast with the low storage code,
to be delivered to all receivers interested in the event.
Figure 10-60 illustrates how such a broadcast is processed by the activity 
manager in order to deliver it to interested receivers. It first asks the package manager
for a list of all receivers interested in the event, which is placed in a 
BroadcastRecord representing that broadcast. The activity manager will then proceed to
step through each entry in the list, having each associated application’s process
create and execute the appropriate receiver class.
Receivers only run as one-shot operations. They are activated only one time.
When an event happens, the system finds any receivers interested in it, delivers that
ev ent to them, and once they hav e consumed the event they are done. There is no
ReceiverRecord like those we have seen for other application components, because
a particular receiver is only a transient entity for the duration of a single broadcast.
Each time a new broadcast is sent to a receiver component, a new instance of that
receiver’s class is created.
