484
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
use the trick to replace instructions that are sensitive, but not privileged. Other
instructions execute natively. The technique is known as binary translation; we
will discuss it more detail in Sec. 7.4.
There is no need to rewrite all sensitive instructions. In particular, user 
processes on the guest can typically run without modification. If the instruction is 
nonprivileged but sensitive and behaves differently in user processes than in the kernel,
that is fine. We are running it in userland anyway. For sensitive instructions that are
privileged, we can resort to the classical trap-and-emulate, as usual. Of course, the
VMM must ensure that it receives the corresponding traps. Typically, the VMM
has a module that executes in the kernel and redirects the traps to its own handlers.
A different form of virtualization is known as paravirtualization. It is quite
different from full virtualization, because it never even aims to present a virtual
machine that looks just like the actual underlying hardware. Instead, it presents a
machine-like software interface that explicitly exposes the fact that it is a 
virtualized environment. For instance, it offers a set of hypercalls, which allow the
guest to send explicit requests to the hypervisor (much as a system call offers 
kernel services to applications). Guests use hypercalls for privileged sensitive 
operations like updating the page tables, but because they do it explicitly in cooperation
with the hypervisor, the overall system can be simpler and faster.
It should not come as a surprise that paravirtualization is not new either. IBM’s
VM operating system has offered such a facility, albeit under a different name,
since 1972. The idea was revived by the Denali (Whitaker et al., 2002) and Xen
(Barham et al., 2003) virtual machine monitors. Compared to full virtualization,
the drawback of paravirtualization is that the guest has to be aware of the virtual
machine API. This means it needs to be customized explicitly for the hypervisor.
Before we delve more deeply into type 1 and type 2 hypervisors, it is important
to mention that not all virtualization technology tries to trick the guest into 
believing that it has the entire system. Sometimes, the aim is simply to allow a process to
run that was originally written for a different operating system and/or architecture.
We therefore distinguish between full system virtualization and process-level 
virtualization. While we focus on the former in the remainder of this chapter, 
process-level virtualization technology is used in practice also. Well-known examples
include the WINE compatibility layer that allows Windows application to run on
POSIX-compliant systems like Linux, BSD, and macOS, and the process-level 
version of the QEMU emulator that allows applications for one architecture to run on
another.
7.3 TYPE 1 AND TYPE 2 HYPERVISORS
Goldberg (1972) distinguished between two approaches to virtualization. One
kind of hypervisor, dubbed a type 1 hypervisor, is illustrated in Fig. 7-1(a). 
Technically, it is like an operating system, since it is the only program running in the
