568
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
1. Blocking send (CPU idle during message transmission).
2. Nonblocking send with copy (CPU time wasted for the extra copy).
3. Nonblocking send with interrupt (makes programming difficult).
4. Copy on write (extra copy probably needed eventually).
Under normal conditions, the first choice is the most convenient, especially if 
multiple threads are available, in which case while one thread is blocked trying to
send, one or more other threads can continue working. It also does not require any
kernel buffers to be managed. Furthermore, as can be seen from comparing
Fig. 8-19(a) to Fig. 8-19(b), the message will usually be out the door faster if no
copy is required.
For the record, we would like to point out that some authors use a different 
criterion to distinguish synchronous from asynchronous primitives. In the alternative
view, a call is synchronous only if the sender is blocked until the message has been
received and an acknowledgement sent back (Andrews, 1991). In the world of
real-time communication, synchronous has yet another meaning, which can lead to
confusion, unfortunately.
Just as send can be blocking or nonblocking, so can receive. A blocking call
just suspends the caller until a message has arrived. If multiple threads are 
available, this is a simple approach. Alternatively, a nonblocking receive just tells the
kernel where the buffer is and returns control almost immediately. An interrupt
can be used to signal that a message has arrived. However, interrupts are difficult
to program and are also quite slow, so it may be preferable for the receiver to poll
for incoming messages using a procedure, poll, that tells whether any messages are
waiting. If so, the called can call get message, which returns the first arrived 
message. In some systems, the compiler can insert poll calls in the code at appropriate
places, although knowing how often to poll is tricky.
Yet another option is a scheme in which the arrival of a message causes a new
thread to be created spontaneously in the receiving process’ address space. Such a
thread is called a pop-up thread. It runs a procedure specified in advance and
whose parameter is a pointer to the incoming message. After processing the 
message, it simply exits and is automatically destroyed.
A variant on this idea is to run the receiver code directly in the interrupt 
handler, without going to the trouble of creating a pop-up thread. To make this scheme
ev en faster, the message itself contains the address of the handler, so when a 
message arrives, the handler can be called in a few instructions. The big win here is
that no copying at all is needed. The handler takes the message from the interface
board and processes it on the fly. This scheme is called active messages (Von
Eicken et al., 1992). Since each message contains the address of the handler,
active messages work only when senders and receivers trust each other completely.
