390
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
particular, they are ‘‘write-heavy’’ and require a fair number of additional writes
due to the parity blocks. Unfortunately, writes are not just relatively expensive,
they also increase the SSD’s wear.
5.5 CLOCKS
Clocks (also called timers) are essential to the operation of any 
multiprogrammed system for a variety of reasons. They maintain the time of day and 
prevent one process from monopolizing the CPU, among other things. The clock 
software can take the form of a device driver, even though a clock is neither a block
device, like a disk, nor a character device, like a mouse. Our examination of clocks
will follow the same pattern as in the previous section: first a look at clock 
hardware and then a look at the clock software.
5.5.1 Clock Hardware
Tw o types of clocks are commonly used in computers, and both are quite 
different from the clocks and watches used by people. The simpler clocks are tied to
the 110- or 220-volt power line and cause an interrupt on every voltage cycle, at 50
or 60 Hz. These clocks used to dominate, but are rare nowadays.
The other kind of clock is built out of three components: a crystal oscillator, a
counter, and a holding register, as shown in Fig. 5-27. When a piece of quartz
crystal is properly cut and mounted under tension, it can be made to generate a
periodic signal of very great accuracy, typically in the range of several hundred
megahertz to a few gigahertz, depending on the crystal chosen. Using electronics,
this base signal can be multiplied by a small integer to get frequencies up to several
gigahertz or even more. At least one such circuit is usually found in any computer,
providing a synchronizing signal to the computer’s various circuits. This signal is
fed into the counter to make it count down to zero. When the counter gets to zero,
it causes a CPU interrupt.
Crystal oscillator
Counter is decremented at each pulse
Holding register is used to load the counter
Figure 5-27. A programmable clock.
