102
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
and puts the results in an output buffer. The output buffer writes these results back
to disk. In this way, input, output, and processing can all be going on at the same
time. Of course, this model works only if a system call blocks only the calling
thread, not the entire process.
2.2.2 The Classical Thread Model
Now that we have seen why threads might be useful and how they can be used,
let us investigate the idea a bit more closely. The process model is based on two
independent concepts: resource grouping and execution. Sometimes it is useful to
separate them; this is where threads come in. First we will look at the classical
thread model; after that we will examine the Linux thread model, which blurs the
line between processes and threads.
One way of looking at a process is that it is a convenient way to group together
related resources. A process has an address space that contains program text and
data, as well as other resources. These resources may include open files, child
processes, pending alarms, signal handlers, accounting information, and more. By
putting them together in the form of a process, they can be managed more easily.
The other concept a process has is a thread of execution, usually shortened to
just thread. The thread has a program counter associated with it that keeps track
of which instruction to execute next. It has registers, which hold its current 
working variables. It also has a stack, which contains the thread’s execution history, one
frame for each procedure called but not yet returned from. Although a thread must
execute in some process, the thread and its process are different concepts and can
be treated separately. Processes are used to group resources together; threads are
the entities scheduled for execution on the CPU.
What threads add to the process model is to allow multiple executions to take
place in the same process environment (and address space), to a large degree 
independent of one another. Having multiple threads running in parallel in one process
is analogous to having multiple processes running in parallel in one computer. In
the former case, the threads share an address space and other resources. In the 
latter case, processes share physical memory, disks, printers, and other resources.
Because threads have some of the properties of processes, they are sometimes 
called lightweight processes. The term multithreading is also used to describe the
situation of allowing multiple threads in the same process. As we saw in Chap. 1,
some CPUs have direct hardware support for multithreading and allow a thread
switch to happen on a nanosecond time scale.
In Fig. 2-10(a) we see three traditional processes. Each process has its own
address space and a single thread of control. In contrast, in Fig. 2-10(b) we see a
single process with three threads of control. Although in both cases we have three
threads, in Fig. 2-10(a) each of them operates in a different address space, whereas
in Fig. 2-10(b) all three of them share the same address space.
