SEC. 7.3
TYPE 1 AND TYPE 2 HYPERVISORS
485
most privileged mode. Its job is to support multiple copies of the actual hardware,
called virtual machines, similar to the processes a normal operating system runs.
Figure 7-1. Location of type 1 and type 2 hypervisors.
In contrast, a type 2 hypervisor, shown in Fig. 7-1(b), is a different kind of
animal. It is a program that relies on, say, Windows or Linux to allocate and
schedule resources, very much like a regular process. Of course, the type 2 
hypervisor still pretends to be a full computer with a CPU and various devices. Both
types of hypervisor must execute the machine’s instruction set in a safe manner.
For instance, an operating system running on top of the hypervisor may change and
ev en mess up its own page tables, but not those of others.
The operating system running on top of the hypervisor in both cases is called
the guest operating system. For a type 2 hypervisor, the operating system running
on the hardware is called the host operating system. The first type 2 hypervisor
on the x86 market was VMware Workstation (Bugnion et al., 2012). In this 
section, we introduce the general idea. A study of VMware in more detail follows in
Sec. 7.12.
Type 2 hypervisors, sometimes referred to as hosted hypervisors, depend for
much of their functionality on a host operating system such as Windows, Linux, or
macOS. When it starts for the first time, it acts like a newly booted computer and
expects to find a DVD, USB drive, or CD-ROM containing an operating system in
the drive. This time, however, the drive could be a virtual device. For instance, it is
possible to store the image as an ISO file on the hard drive of the host and have the
hypervisor pretend it is reading from a proper DVD drive. It then installs the 
operating system to its virtual disk (again really just a Windows, Linux, or macOS
file) by running the installation program found on the DVD. Once the guest 
operating system is installed on the virtual disk, it can be booted and run. It is 
completely unaware that it has been tricked.
The various categories of virtualization we have discussed are summarized in
the table of Fig. 7-2 for both type 1 and type 2 hypervisors. For each combination
of hypervisor and kind of virtualization, some examples are given.
