SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
385
huge improvement is to keep track of which block was being written during a 
stable write so that only one block has to be checked during recovery. Many 
computers have a small amount of nonvolatile RAM, which is a special CMOS 
memory powered by a lithium battery. Such batteries last for years, possibly even the
whole life of the computer. Unlike main memory, which is lost after a crash, 
nonvolatile RAM is not lost after a crash. The time of day is normally kept here (and
incremented by a special circuit), which is why computers still know what time it
is even after having been unplugged.
Suppose that a few bytes of nonvolatile RAM are available for operating 
system purposes. The stable write can put the number of the block it is about to update
in nonvolatile RAM before starting the write. After successfully completing the
stable write, the block number in nonvolatile RAM is overwritten with an invalid
block number, for example, <1. Under these conditions, after a crash the recovery
program can check the nonvolatile RAM to see if a stable write happened to be in
progress during the crash, and if so, which block was being written when the
crashed happened. The two copies of the block can then be checked for correctness
and consistency.
If nonvolatile RAM is not available, it can be simulated as follows. At the start
of a stable write, a fixed disk block on drive 1 is overwritten with the number of
the block to be stably written. This block is then read back to verify it. After 
getting it correct, the corresponding block on drive 2 is written and verified. When the
stable write completes correctly, both blocks are overwritten with an invalid block
number and verified. Again here, after a crash it is easy to determine whether or
not a stable write was in progress during the crash. Of course, this technique
requires eight extra disk operations to write a stable block, so it should be used
exceedingly sparingly.
One last point is worth making. We assumed that only one spontaneous decay
of a good block to a bad block happens per block pair per day. If enough days go
by, the other one might go bad, too. Therefore, once a day a complete scan of both
disks must be done, repairing any damage. That way, every morning both disks are
always identical. Even if both blocks in a pair go bad within a period of a few
days, all errors are repaired correctly.
5.4.3 RAID
One technique that now helps improve the reliability of storage systems in 
general originally became popular as a measure to boost the performance of magnetic
disk storage systems. Before SSDs came along, CPU performance had been
increasing exponentially for decades, for a long time roughly doubling every 18
months. Not so with disk performance. In the 1970s, average seek times on 
minicomputer disks were 50 to 100 msec. Today seek times on magnetic disks are still
a few msec. In most technical industries (say, automobiles, aviation, or trains), a
factor 10 performance improvement in two decades would be major news (imagine
