SEC. 9.4
AUTHENTICATION
645
password in them that the reader would send to the central computer, but in 
practoce this is rarely, if ever, done.
Smart cards can be used to hold money, as do stored value cards, but with
much better security and universality. The cards can be loaded with money at an
ATM machine or at home over the telephone using a special reader supplied by the
bank. When inserted into a merchant’s reader, the user can authorize the card to
deduct a certain amount of money from the card (by typing YES), causing the card
to send a little encrypted message to the merchant. The merchant can later turn the
message over to a bank to be credited for the amount paid.
An advantage of smart cards over, say, credit or debit cards, is that they do not
need an online connection to a bank. If you do not believe this is an advantage, try
the following experiment. Try to buy a single candy bar at a store and insist on
paying by credit card. If the merchant objects, say you have no cash with you and
besides, you need the frequent flyer miles. You will discover that the merchant is
not enthusiastic about the idea (because the associated bank charges dwarf the
profit on the item). This makes smart cards useful for small store purchases, 
parking meters, vending machines, and many other devices that normally require coins.
Smart cards have other potentially valuable uses (e.g., encoding the bearer’s
allergies and other medical conditions in a secure way for use in emergencies), but
this is not the place to tell that story. Our interest here is how they can be used for
secure login authentication. The basic idea is simple: a smart card is a small, 
tamperproof computer that can engage in a discussion, called a protocol, with a 
central computer to authenticate the user. For example, a user wishing to buy things at
an e-commerce Website could insert a smart card into a home reader attached to
his PC. The e-commerce site would not only use the smart card to authenticate the
user in a more secure way than a password, but could also deduct the purchase
price from the smart card directly, eliminating a great deal of the overhead (and
risk) associated with using a credit card for online purchases.
Various authentication schemes can be used with a smart card. A particularly
simple challenge-response works like this. The server sends a 1024-bit random
number to the smart card, which then adds the user’s 1024-bit password stored in
the card’s ROM to it. The sum is then squared and the middle 1024 bits are sent
back to the server, which knows the user’s password and can compute whether the
result is correct or not. The sequence is shown in Fig. 9-16. If a wiretapper sees
both messages, he will not be able to make much sense out of them, and recording
them for future use is pointless because on the next login, a different 1024-bit 
random number will be sent. In practice, a much better algorithm is used.
9.4.3 Authentication Using Biometrics
The third authentication method measures physical characteristics of the user
that are hard to forge. These are called biometrics (Boulgouris et al., 2010; and
Campisi, 2013). For example, many operating systems for smart phones and 
notebooks use face recognition and/or fingerprints to verify the user’s identity.
