SEC. 11.2
PROGRAMMING WINDOWS
891
the identity and privileges associated with the thread. Every object can have an
ACL (Access Control List) telling in great detail precisely which users may
access it and which operations they may perform on it. This approach provides for
fine-grained security in which specific users can be allowed or denied specific
access to every object. The security model is extensible, allowing applications to
add new security rules, such as limiting the hours access is permitted.
The Win32 namespace is different than the native NT namespace described in
the previous section. Only parts of the NT namespace are visible to Win32 APIs
(though the entire NT namespace can be accessed through a Win32 hack that uses
special prefix strings, like ‘‘ \ \ .’ ’). In Win32, files are accessed relative to drive 
letters. The NT directory \ DosDevices contains a set of symbolic links from drive 
letters to the actual device objects. For example, \ DosDevices \ C: might be a link to
\ Device \ HarddiskVolume1. This directory also contains links for other Win32 
devices, such as COM1:, LPT:, and NUL: (for the serial and printer ports and the
all-important null device). \ DosDevices is really a symbolic link to \ ?? which was
chosen for efficiency. Another NT directory, \ BaseNamedObjects, is used to store
miscellaneous named kernel-mode objects accessible through the Win32 API.
These include synchronization objects like semaphores, shared memory, timers,
communication ports, and device names.
In addition to low-level system interfaces we have described, the Win32 API
also supports many calls for GUI operations, including all the calls for managing
the graphical interface of the system. There are calls for creating, destroying, 
managing, and using windows, menus, tool bars, status bars, scroll bars, dialog boxes,
icons, and many more items that appear on the screen. There are calls for drawing
geometric figures, filling them in, managing the color palettes they use, dealing
with fonts, and placing icons on the screen. In contrast, in Linux, none of this is in
the kernel. Finally, there are calls for dealing with the keyboard, mouse, and other
human-input devices as well as audio, printing, and other output devices.
The GUI operations work directly with the win32k.sys driver using special
interfaces to access these functions in kernel mode from user-mode libraries. Since
these calls do not involve the core system calls in the NTOS executive, we will not
say more about them.
11.2.5 The Windows Registry
The root of the NT namespace is maintained in the kernel. Storage, such as
file-system volumes, is attached to the NT namespace. Since the NT namespace is
constructed afresh every time the system boots, how does the system know about
any specific details of the system configuration? The answer is that Windows 
attaches a special kind of file system (optimized for small files) to the NT 
namespace. This file system is called the registry. The registry is organized into 
separate volumes called hives. Each hive is kept in a separate file (in the directory
C: \ Windows \ system32 \ config \ of the boot volume). When a Windows system
