SEC. 11.10
VIRTUALIZATION IN WINDOWS
1007
over VMBus to provide various services. The most common use of VSPs is for
paravirtualized and accelerated devices, but other applications such as syncing time
in the guest or implementing dynamic memory via ballooning also exist.
The user-mode virtualization components are for managing VMs as well as 
device support and orchestration of VM operations such as start, stop, pause, resume,
live migration, snapshot, etc. VMMS (Virtual Machine Management Service)
exposes interfaces for other management tools to query and manage virtual
machines. HCS performs a similar task for containers. For each VM, VMMS 
creates a virtual machine worker process, VMWP.exe. VMWP manages the state of the
VM and its state transitions. It includes VDEVs (Virtual Devices), which 
represent things like the virtual motherboard, disks, networking devices, BIOS,
keyboard, mouse, etc. As the virtual machine boots and VDEVs are ‘‘powered on,’’
they set up I/O ports or MMIO ranges in the GPA space through the VID driver or
they communicate with their VSP driver to initiate VMBus channel set up with the
corresponding VSC in the guest.
Device I/O
There are several ways Hyper-V can expose devices to its guests depending on
how enlightened the guest OS is and the level of virtualization support in the 
hardware.
1. Emulated devices: An unenlightened guest communicates with 
devices through I/O ports or memory-mapped device registers. For 
emulated devices, the VDEV sets up these ports and GPA ranges to cause
hypervisor intercepts when accessed. The intercepts are then 
forwarded to the VDEV running in the VM worker process through the
VID driver. In response, the VDEV initiates the I/O requested by the
guest and resumes the guest VP. Typically, when the I/O is complete,
the VDEV will inject a synthetic interrupt into the guest via the VID
and the hypervisor to signal completion. Emulated devices require too
many context switches between the guest and the host and are not
appropriate for high-bandwidth devices, but are perfectly OK for 
devices like keyboard and mouse.
2. Paravirtualized devices: When a synthetic device is exposed to a
guest partition from its VDEV, an enlightened guest will load the 
corresponding VSC driver which sets up VMBus communication with its
VSP in the root. A very common example of this is storage. Virtual
hard disks are typically used with VMs and are exposed via the
StorVSP and StorVSC drivers. Once the VMBus channel is set up,
I/O requests received by the StorVSC are communicated to the
StorVSP which then issues them to the corresponding virtual hard
disk via the vhdmp.sys driver. Figure 11-51 illustrates this flow.
