SEC. 10.6
THE LINUX FILE SYSTEM
783
/proc/619 is the directory corresponding to the process with PID 619. In this 
directory are files that appear to contain information about the process, such as its 
command line, environment strings, and signal masks. In fact, these files do not exist
on the disk. When they are read, the system retrieves the information from the
actual process as needed and returns it in a standard format.
Many of the Linux extensions relate to other files and directories located in
/proc. They contain a wide variety of information about the CPU, disk partitions,
devices, interrupt vectors, kernel counters, file systems, loaded modules, and much
more. Unprivileged user programs may read much of this information to learn
about system behavior in a safe way. Some of these files may be written to in order
to change system parameters.
10.6.4 NFS: The Network File System
Networking has played a major role in Linux, and UNIX in general, right from
the beginning (the first UNIX network was built to move new kernels from the
PDP-11/70 to the Interdata 8/32 during the port to the latter). In this section, we
will examine Sun Microsystem’s NFS (Network File System), which is used on
all modern Linux systems to join the file systems on separate computers into one
logical whole. NSF version 3 was introduced in 1994. Currently, the most recent
version is NSFv4. It was originally introduced in 2000 and provides several
enhancements over the previous NFS architecture. Three aspects of NFS are of
interest: the architecture, the protocol, and the implementation. We will now
examine these in turn, first in the context of the simpler NFS version 3, then we
will turn to the enhancements included in v4.
NFS Architecture
The basic idea behind NFS is to allow an arbitrary collection of clients and 
servers to share a common file system. In many cases, all the clients and servers are
on the same LAN, but this is not required. It is also possible to run NFS over a
wide area network if the server is far from the client. For simplicity, we will speak
of clients and servers as though they were on distinct machines, but in fact, NFS
allows every machine to be both a client and a server at the same time.
Each NFS server exports one or more of its directories for access by remote
clients. When a directory is made available, so are all of its subdirectories, so 
actually entire directory trees are normally exported as a unit. The list of directories a
server exports is maintained in a file, often /etc/exports, so these directories can be
exported automatically whenever the server is booted. Clients access exported
directories by mounting them. When a client mounts a (remote) directory, it
becomes part of its directory hierarchy, as shown in Fig. 10-35.
In this example, client 1 has mounted the bin directory of server 1 on its own
bin directory, so it can now refer to the shell as /bin/sh and get the shell on server
