CHAP. 2  
PROBLEMS
177
(d) Q = S
(e) Q nearly 0
44. Five jobs are waiting to be run. Their expected run times are 9, 6, 3, 5, and X. In what
order should they be run to minimize average response time? (Your answer will
depend on X.)
45. Five batch jobs, A through E, arrive at almost the same time. They hav e estimated 
running times of 10, 6, 2, 4, and 8 minutes. Their (externally determined) priorities are 3,
5, 2, 1, and 4, respectively, with 5 being the highest priority. For each of the following
scheduling algorithms, determine the mean process turnaround time. Ignore process
switching overhead.
(a) Round robin.
(b) Priority scheduling.
(c) First-come, first-served (run in order 10, 6, 2, 4, 8).
(d) Shortest job first.
For (a), assume that the system is multiprogrammed, and that each job gets its fair
share of the CPU. For (b) through (d), assume that only one job at a time runs, until it
finishes. All jobs are completely CPU bound.
46. A process running on CTSS needs 30 quanta to complete. How many times must it be
swapped in, including the very first time (before it has run at all)?
47. Consider a real-time system with two voice calls of periodicity 5 msec each with CPU
time per call of 1 msec, and one video stream of periodicity 33 msec with CPU time
per call of 11 msec. Is this system schedulable? Show how you derived your answer.
48. For the above problem, can another video stream be added and have the system still be
schedulable?
49. The aging algorithm with a = 1/2 is being used to predict run times. The previous four
runs, from oldest to most recent, are 40, 20, 40, and 15 msec. What is the prediction of
the next time?
50. A soft real-time system has four periodic events with periods of 50, 100, 200, and 250
msec each. Suppose that the four events require 35, 20, 10, and x msec of CPU time,
respectively. What is the largest value of x for which the system is schedulable?
51. A real-time system needs to handle two voice calls that each run every 6 msec and 
consume 1 msec of CPU time per burst, plus one video at 25 frames/sec, with each frame
requiring 20 msec of CPU time. Is this system schedulable?
52. Consider a system in which it is desired to separate policy and mechanism for the
scheduling of kernel threads. Propose a means of achieving this goal.
53. The readers and writers problem can be formulated in several ways with regard to
which category of processes can be started when. Carefully describe three different
variations of the problem, each one favoring (or not favoring) some category of 
processes (e.g., readers or writers). For each variation, specify what happens when a reader
or a writer becomes ready to access the database, and what happens when a process is
finished.
