PREFACE
xxv
attestation. Since there is much ongoing research in this area, new 
references have been added and the research section has been rewritten.
•
Chapter 10 has been updated with new dev elopments in Linux and
Android. Android has evolved considerably since the previous edition,
and this chapter covers the current version in detail. This section has
been substantially rewritten.
•
Chapter 11 has changed significantly. Where the fourth edition was on
Windows 8.1, we now discuss Windows 11. It is basically a new 
chapter.
•
Chapter 12 is a slightly revised version of the previous edition. This
chapter covers the basic principles of system design, and they hav e not
changed much in the past few years.
•
Chapter 13 is a thoroughly updated list of suggested readings. In 
addition, the list of references has been updated, with entries to well over
100 new works published after the fourth edition of this book came
out.
•
In addition, the sections on research throughout the book have all been
redone from scratch to reflect the latest research in operating systems.
Furthermore, new problems have been added to all the chapters.
Instructor supplements (including the PowerPoint sheets) can be found at
A number of people have been involved in the fifth edition. The material in
Chap. 7 on VMware (in Sec. 7.12) was written by Edouard Bugnion of EPFL in
Lausanne, Switzerland. Ed was one of the founders of the VMware company and
knows this material as well as anyone in the world. We thank him greatly for 
supplying it to us.
Ada Gavrilovska of Georgia Tech, who is an expert on Linux internals, 
updated Chap. 10 from the Fourth Edition, which she also wrote. The Android 
material in Chap. 10 was written by Dianne Hackborn of Google, one of the key
developers of the Android system. Android is the most popular operating system
on smartphones, so we are very grateful to have Dianne help us. Chapter 10 is now
quite long and detailed, but UNIX, Linux, and Android fans can learn a lot from it.
We hav en’t neglected Windows, however. Mehmet Iyigun of Microsoft 
updated Chap. 11 from the previous edition of the book. This time the chapter covers
Windows 11 in detail. Mehmet has a great deal of knowledge of Windows and
enough vision to tell the difference between places where Microsoft got it right and
where it got it wrong. He was ably assisted by Andrea Allievi, Pedro Justo, Chris
Kleynhans, and Erick Smith. Windows fans are certain to enjoy this chapter.
The book is much better as a result of the work of all these expert contributors.
Again, we would like to thank them for their invaluable help.
http://www.pearsonglobaleditions.com.
