SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
799
5. Android 6.0 (2015): Permission model changed from install-time to
runtime, reflecting a shift in focus from security to privacy and the
increasing complexity of mobile applications with a growing number
of secondary features. Introduced the original ‘‘doze mode’’ to take a
stronger hand in what apps can do in the background. Security is
about protected the device and the user from harm caused by 
outsiders whereas privacy is focused on protecting the user’s information
from snooping. They are quite different and need different 
approaches.
6. Android 7.0 (2016): Extended ‘‘doze mode’’ to cover most situations
when the screen is off. On all battery-powered devices, managed
energy usage to avoid draining the battery too fast is crucial to the
user experience, so in Android 7.0 there was more attention to it.
7. Android 8.0 (2017): A new abstraction, called Treble, was introduced
between the Android system and lower-level hardware touched by the
kernel and drivers. Similar to the HAL (Hardware Abstraction Layer)
in the Windows kernel, Treble provides a stable interface between the
bulk of Android and hardware-specific kernel and drivers. It is 
structured like a microkernel with Treble drivers running in separate 
userspace processes and Binder IPC (covered later) used to communicate
with them. It also placed strong limits on how applications could run
in the background, as well as differentiation between background vs.
foreground for location access.
8. Android 9 (2018): Limited the ability of applications to launch into
their foreground interface while running in the background. 
Introduced ‘‘adaptive battery,’’ where a machine-learning system helps
guide the system in deciding the importance of background work 
across applications.
9. Android 10 (2019): Provided user control over an app’s ability to
access location information while in the background. Introduced
‘‘scoped storage’’ to better control data access across applications that
are putting data on external storage (such as SD cards).
10. Android 11 (2020): Allowed the user to select ‘‘only this once’’ for
permissions that provide access to continuous personal data: location,
camera, and microphone.
11. Android 12 (2021): Gav e the user control over coarse vs. fine 
location access. Introduced a ‘‘permissions hub’’ allowing users to see
how applications have been accessing their personal data. Limited
other cases (using foreground services) where applications could go
into a foreground state from the background.
