398
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
Tw o possible philosophies can be adopted for the driver. In the first one, the
driver’s job is just to accept input and pass it upward unmodified. A program 
reading from the keyboard gets a raw sequence of ASCII codes. (Giving user programs
the scan codes is too primitive, as well as being highly keyboard dependent.)
This philosophy is well suited to the needs of sophisticated screen editors such
as Emacs, which allow the user to bind an arbitrary action to any character or
sequence of characters. It does, however, mean that if the user types dste instead
of date and then corrects the error by typing three backspaces and ate, followed by
a carriage return, the user program will be given all 11 ASCII codes typed, as 
follows:
d s t e @ @ @ a t e CR
Not all programs want this much detail. Often they just want the corrected
input, not the exact sequence of how it was produced. This observation leads to the
second philosophy: the driver handles all the intraline editing and just delivers 
corrected lines to the user programs. The first philosophy is character oriented; the
second one is line oriented. Originally they were referred to as raw mode and
cooked mode, respectively. The POSIX standard uses the less-picturesque term
canonical mode to describe line-oriented mode. Noncanonical mode is 
equivalent to raw mode, although many details of the behavior can be changed. 
POSIXcompatible systems provide several library functions that support selecting either
mode and changing many parameters.
If the keyboard is in canonical (cooked) mode, characters must be stored until
an entire line has been accumulated, because the user may subsequently decide to
erase part of it. Even if the keyboard is in raw mode, the program may not yet have
requested input, so the characters must be buffered to allow type ahead. Either a
dedicated buffer can be used or buffers can be allocated from a pool. The former
puts a fixed limit on type ahead; the latter does not. This issue arises most acutely
when the user is typing to a shell window (also known as command-line window)
and has just issued a command (such as a compilation) that has not yet completed.
Subsequent characters typed have to be buffered because the shell is not ready to
read them. System designers who do not permit users to type far ahead ought to be
tarred and feathered, or worse yet, forced to use their own system.
Although the keyboard and monitor are logically separate devices, many users
have grown accustomed to seeing the characters they hav e just typed appear on the
screen. This process is called echoing.
Echoing is complicated by the fact that a program may be writing to the screen
while the user is typing (again, think about typing to a shell window). At the very
least, the keyboard driver has to figure out where to put the new input without its
being overwritten by program output.
Echoing also gets complicated when more than 80 characters have to be 
displayed in a window with 80-character lines (or some other number). Depending on
the application, wrapping around to the next line may be appropriate. However,
