794
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
10.8.1 Android and Google
Android is an unusual operating system in the way it combines open-source
code with closed-source third-party applications. The open-source part of Android
is called the AOSP (Android Open Source Project) and is completely open and
free to be used and modified by anyone.
An important goal of Android is to support a rich third-party application 
environment, which requires having a stable implementation and API for applications
to run against. However, in an open-source world where every device 
manufacturer can customize the platform however it wants, compatibility issues quickly
arise. There needs to be some way to control this conflict.
Part of the solution to this for Android is the CDD (Compatibility Definition
Document), which describes the ways Android must behave to be compatible with
third party applications. This document describes what is required to be a 
compatible Android device. Without some way to enforce such compatibility, howev er, it
will often be ignored; there needs to be some additional mechanism to do this.
Android solves this by allowing additional proprietary services to be created
on top of the open-source platform, providing (typically cloud-based) services that
the platform cannot itself implement. Since these services are proprietary, they can
restrict which devices are allowed to include them, thus requiring CDD 
compatibility of those devices.
Google implemented Android to be able to support a wide variety of 
proprietary cloud services, with Google’s extensive set of services being representative
cases: Gmail, calendar and contacts sync, cloud-to-device messaging, and many
other services, some visible to the user, some not. When it comes to offering 
compatible apps, the most important service is Google Play.
Google Play is Google’s online store for Android apps. Generally when 
developers create Android applications, they will publish with Google Play. Since
Google Play (or any other application store) is a significant channel through which
applications are delivered to an Android device, that proprietary service is 
responsible for ensuring that applications will work on the devices it delivers them to.
Google Play uses two main mechanisms to ensure compatibility. The first and
most important is requiring that any device shipping with it must be a compatible
Android device as per the CDD. This ensures a baseline of behavior across all 
devices. In addition, Google Play must know about any features of a device that an
application requires (such as having a touch screen, camera hardware, or telephony
support) so the application is not made available on devices that lack them.
10.8.2 History of Android
Google developed Android in the mid-2000s, after acquiring Android as a
startup company early in its development. Nearly all the development of the
Android platform that exists today was done under Google’s management.
