SEC. 11.9
WINDOWS POWER MANAGEMENT
1003
to discriminate between traffic from different connections means the processor
does not have to awaken for every random packet that arrives at the network 
interface.
11.10 VIRTUALIZATION IN WINDOWS
In the early 2000s, as computers were getting larger and more powerful, the
industry started turning to virtual machine technology to partition large machine
into a number of smaller virtual machines sharing the same physical hardware.
This technology was originally used primarily in data centers or hosting 
environments. In the next decade, however, attention turned to more fine-grained software
virtualization and containers came into fashion.
Docker Inc. popularized the use of containers on Linux with its popular
Docker container manager. Microsoft added support for these types of containers
to Windows in Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016 and partnered with Docker
Inc. so that customers could use the same popular management platform on 
Windows. Additionally, Windows started shipping with the Microsoft Hyper-V 
hypervisor so that the OS itself could leverage hardware virtualization to increase 
security. In this section, we will first look at Hyper-V and its implementation of 
hardware virtualization. Then we will study containers built purely from software and
describe some of the OS features that leverage hardware virtualization features.
11.10.1 Hyper-V
Hyper-V is Microsoft’s virtualization solution for creating and managing 
virtual machines. The hypervisor sits at the bottom of the Hyper-V software stack and
provides the core hardware virtualization functionality. It is a Type-1 (bare metal)
hypervisor that runs directly on top of the hardware. The hypervisor uses 
virtualization extensions supported by the CPU to virtualize the hardware such that
multiple guest operating systems can run concurrently, each in its own isolated 
virtual machine, called a partition. The hypervisor works with the other Hyper-V
components in the virtualization stack to provide virtual machine management
(such as startup, shutdown, pause, resume, live migration, snapshots, and device
support). The virtualization stack runs in a special privileged partition called the
root partition. The root partition must be running Windows, but any operating
system, such as Linux, can be running in guest partitions which are also called
child partitions. While it is possible to run guest operating systems that are 
completely unaware of virtualization, performance will suffer. Now adays, most 
operating systems are enlightened to run as a guest and include guest counterparts to the
root virtualization stack components which help provide higher-performance 
paravirtualized disk or network I/O. An overview of Hyper-V components is given in
Fig. 11-50. We will discuss these components in the upcoming sections.
