320
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
I-nodes are!
located near!
the start!
of the disk
Disk is divided into!
cylinder groups, each!
with its own i-nodes
(a)
(b)
Cylinder group
Figure 4-31. (a) I-nodes placed at the start of the disk. (b) Disk divided into 
cylinder groups, each with its own blocks and i-nodes.
One easy performance improvement is to put the i-nodes in the middle of the
disk, rather than at the start, thus reducing the average seek between the i-node and
the first block by a factor of two. Another idea, shown in Fig. 4-31(b), is to divide
the disk into cylinder groups, each with its own i-nodes, blocks, and free list
(McKusick et al., 1984). When creating a new file, any i-node can be chosen, but
an attempt is made to find a block in the same cylinder group as the i-node. If
none is available, then a block in a nearby cylinder group is used.
Of course, disk-arm movement and rotation time are relevant only if the disk
has them and are not relevant for SSDs, which have no moving parts whatsoever.
For these drives, built on the same technology as flash cards, random (read)
accesses are just as fast as sequential ones and many of the problems of traditional
disks go away (only for new ones emerge).
4.4.5 Defragmenting Disks
When the operating system is initially installed, the programs and files it needs
are installed consecutively starting at the beginning of the disk, each one directly
following the previous one. All free disk space is in a single contiguous unit 
following the installed files. However, as time goes on, files are created and removed
and typically the disk becomes badly fragmented, with files and holes all over the
place. As a consequence, when a new file is created, the blocks used for it may be
spread all over the disk, giving poor performance.
The performance can be restored by moving files around to make them 
contiguous and to put all (or at least most) of the free space in one or more large 
contiguous regions on the disk. Windows has a program, defrag, that does precisely this.
Windows users should run it regularly, except on SSDs.
