SEC. 11.3
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
915
namespace and file-system volumes. The configuration manager uses an object of
type key to link in the registry hives. The object manager itself has objects it uses
to manage the NT namespace and implement objects using a common facility.
These are directory, symbolic link, and object-type objects.
The uniformity provided by the object manager has various facets. All these
objects use the same mechanism for how they are created, destroyed, and 
accounted for in the quota system. They can all be accessed from user-mode processes
using handles. There is a unified convention for managing pointer references to
objects from within the kernel. Objects can be given names in the NT namespace
(which is managed by the object manager). Dispatcher objects (objects that begin
with the common data structure for signaling events) can use common 
synchronization and notification interfaces, like WaitForMultipleObjects. There is the 
common security system with ACLs enforced on objects opened by name, and access
checks on each use of a handle. There are even facilities to help kernel-mode
developers debug problems by tracing the use of objects.
A key to understanding objects is to realize that an (executive) object is just a
data structure in the virtual memory accessible to kernel mode. These data 
structures are commonly used to represent more abstract concepts. As examples, 
executive file objects are created for each instance of a file-system file that has been
opened. Process objects are created to represent each process. Communication
objects (e.g., semaphores) are another example.
A consequence of the fact that objects are just kernel data structures is that
when the system is rebooted (or crashes) all objects are lost. When the system
boots, there are no objects present at all, not even the object-type descriptors. All
object types, and the objects themselves, have to be created dynamically by other
components of the executive layer by calling the interfaces provided by the object
manager. When objects are created and a name is specified, they can later be 
referenced through the NT namespace. So building up the objects as the system boots
also builds the NT namespace.
Objects have a structure, as shown in Fig. 11-15. Each object contains a 
header with certain information common to all objects of all types. The fields in this
header include the object’s name, the object directory in which it lives in the NT
namespace, and a pointer to a security descriptor representing the ACL for the
object.
The memory allocated for objects comes from one of two heaps (or pools) of
memory maintained by the executive layer. There are (malloc-like) utility functions
in the executive that allow kernel-mode components to allocate either pageable or
non-pageable kernel memory. Non-pageable memory is required for any data 
structure or kernel-mode object that might need to be accessed from a CPU interrupt
request level of 2 or more. This includes ISRs and DPCs (but not APCs) and the
thread scheduler itself. The page-fault handler and the paging path through the file
system and storage drivers also require their data structures to be allocated from
non-pageable kernel memory to avoid recursion.
