SEC. 1.5
OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS
41
A
B
D
E
F
C
Figure 1-13. A process tree. Process A created two child processes, B and C.
Process B created three child processes, D, E, and F.
Occasionally, there is a need to convey information to a running process that is
not sitting around waiting for this information. For example, a process that is 
communicating with another process on a different computer does so by sending 
messages to the remote process over a computer network. To guard against the 
possibility that a message or its reply is lost, the sender may request that its own 
operating system notify it after a specified number of seconds, so that it can retransmit
the message if no acknowledgement has been received yet. After setting this timer,
the program may continue doing other work.
When the specified number of seconds has elapsed, the operating system sends
an alarm signal to the process. The signal causes the process to temporarily 
suspend whatever it was doing, save its registers on the stack, and start running a 
special signal-handling procedure, for example, to retransmit a presumably lost 
message. When the signal handler is done, the running process is restarted in the state
it was in just before the signal. Signals are the software analog of hardware 
interrupts and can be generated by a variety of causes in addition to timers expiring.
Many traps detected by hardware, such as executing an illegal instruction or using
an invalid address, are also converted into signals to the guilty process.
Each person authorized to use a system is assigned a UID (User 
IDentification) by the system administrator. Every process started has the UID of the person
who started it. On UNIX, a child process has the same UID as its parent. Users can
be members of groups, each of which has a GID (Group IDentification).
One UID, called the superuser or root (in UNIX), or Administrator (in 
Windows), has special power and may override many of the protection rules. In large
installations, only the system administrator knows the superuser password, but
many of the ordinary users (especially students) devote considerable effort seeking
flaws in the system that allow them to become superuser without the password.
We will study processes and interprocess communication in Chap. 2.
1.5.2 Address Spaces
Every computer has some main memory that it uses to hold executing 
programs. In a very simple operating system, only one program at a time is in 
memory. To run a second program, the first one has to be removed and the second one
placed in memory. This is known as swapping.
