SEC. 1.5
OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS
45
nearly always mounted on empty directories.) If a system contains multiple hard
disks, they can all be mounted into a single tree as well.
Another important concept in UNIX is the special file. Special files are 
provided in order to make I/O devices look like files. That way, they can be read and
written using the same system calls as are used for reading and writing files. Two
kinds of special files exist: block special files and character special files. Block
special files are used to model devices that consist of a collection of randomly
addressable blocks, such as SSDs and disks. By opening a block special file and
reading, say, block 4, a program can directly access the fourth block on the device,
without regard to the structure of the file system contained on it. Similarly, 
character special files are used to model printers, keyboards, mice, and other devices that
accept or output a character stream. By convention, the special files are kept in the
/dev directory. For example, /dev/lp might be the printer (once called the line 
printer).
The last feature we will discuss in this overview relates to both processes and
files: pipes. A pipe is a sort of pseudofile that can be used to connect two 
processes, as shown in Fig. 1-16. If processes A and B wish to talk using a pipe, they
must set it up in advance. When process A wants to send data to process B, it writes
on the pipe as though it were an output file. In fact, the implementation of a pipe is
very much like that of a file. Process B can read the data by reading from the pipe
as though it were an input file. Thus, communication between processes in UNIX
looks very much like ordinary file reads and writes. Stronger yet, the only way a
process can discover that the output file it is writing on is not really a file, but a
pipe, is by making a special system call. File systems are very important. We will
have much more to say about them in Chap. 4 and also in Chaps. 10 and 11.
Process
Pipe
Process
A
B
Figure 1-16. Tw o processes connected by a pipe.
1.5.4 Input/Output
All computers have physical devices for acquiring input and producing output.
After all, what good would a computer be if the users could not tell it what to do
and could not get the results after it did the work requested? Many kinds of input
and output devices exist, including keyboards, monitors, printers, and so on. It is
up to the operating system to manage these devices.
Consequently, every operating system has an I/O subsystem for managing its
I/O devices. Some of the I/O software is device independent, that is, it applies to
many or all I/O devices equally well. Other parts of it, such as device drivers, are
specific to particular I/O devices. In Chap. 5, we will have a look at I/O software.
