679
by inserting a memory fence (such as the one we saw in Sec. 2.5.9) right after the
branch instruction in Line 1, which simply stops all speculation until the condition
is resolved.
Transient execution attacks such as Meltdown and Spectre have spawned a
whole new domain of security research. New vulnerabilities are found every few
months and new fixes are released by CPU vendors and operating system 
developers at the same frequency. Unfortunately, all these mitigations chip away at 
performance. You may find that some newer processors (with all defenses up) are
slower than older processors. We hav e not seen that often in the past 50 years!
9.7 INSIDER ATTA CKS
A whole different category of attacks are what might be termed ‘‘inside jobs.’’
These are executed by programmers and other employees of the company running
the computer to be protected or making critical software. These attacks differ from
external attacks because the insiders have specialized knowledge and access that
outsiders do not have. Below we will give a few examples; all of them have
occurred repeatedly in the past. Each one has a different flavor in terms of who is
doing the attacking, who is being attacked, and what the attacker is trying to
achieve.
9.7.1 Logic Bombs
In these times of massive outsourcing, programmers often worry about their
jobs. Sometimes they even take steps to make their potential (involuntary) 
departure less painful. For those who are inclined toward blackmail, one strategy is to
write a logic bomb. This device is a piece of code written by one of a company’s
(currently employed) programmers and secretly inserted into the production 
system. As long as the programmer feeds it its daily password, it is happy and does
nothing. However, if the programmer is suddenly fired and physically removed
from the premises without warning, the next day (or next week) the logic bomb
does not get fed its daily password, so it goes off. Many variants on this theme are
also possible. In one famous case, the logic bomb checked the payroll. If the 
personnel number of the programmer did not appear in it for two consecutive payroll
periods, it went off (Spafford et al., 1989).
Going off might involve clearing the disk, erasing files at random, carefully
making hard-to-detect changes to key programs, or encrypting essential files. In
the latter case, the company has a tough choice about whether to call the police
(which may or may not result in a conviction many months later but certainly does
not restore the missing files) or to give in to the blackmail and rehire the 
ex-programmer as a ‘‘consultant’’ for an astronomical sum to fix the problem (and hope
that he does not plant new logic bombs while doing so).
SEC. 9.6
EXPLOITING HARDWARE
