SEC. 11.4
PROCESSES AND THREADS IN WINDOWS
933
a kernel event is signaled. Synchronization can be used as triggers for queuing a
task so threads are not assigned the task before it is ready to run.
The implementation of the thread pool uses the same queue facility provided
for synchronization with I/O completion, together with a kernel-mode thread 
factory which adds more threads to the process as needed to keep the available 
number of processors busy. Small tasks exist in many applications, but particularly in
those that provide services in the client/server model of computing, where a stream
of requests are sent from the clients to the server. Use of a thread pool for these
scenarios improves the efficiency of the system by reducing the overhead of 
creating threads and moving the decisions about how to manage the threads in the pool
out of the application and into the operating system.
A summary of CPU execution abstractions is given in Fig. 11-23.
Name 
Description
Notes
Job 
Collection of processes that share quotas and limits
Used in AppContainers
Process 
Container for holding resources
Thread 
Entity scheduled by the ker nel
Fiber 
Lightweight thread managed entirely in user space
Rarely used
Thread pool
Task-or iented programming model
Built on top of threads
Figure 11-23. Basic concepts used for CPU and resource management.
Threads
Every process normally starts out with one thread, but new ones can be created
dynamically. Threads form the basis of CPU scheduling, as the operating system
always selects a thread to run, not a process. Consequently, every thread has a state
(ready, running, blocked, etc.), whereas processes do not have scheduling states.
Threads can be created dynamically by a Win32 call that specifies the address
within the enclosing process’ address space at which it is to start running.
Every thread has a thread ID, which is taken from the same space as the 
process IDs, so a single ID can never be in use for both a process and a thread at the
same time. Process and thread IDs are multiples of four because they are actually
allocated by the executive using a special handle table set aside for allocating IDs.
The system is reusing the scalable handle-management facility illustrated in
Figs. 11-16 and 11-17. The handle table does not have references for objects, but
does use the pointer field to point at the process or thread so that the lookup of a
process or thread by ID is very efficient. FIFO ordering of the list of free handles is
turned on for the ID table in recent versions of Windows so that IDs are not
immediately reused. The problems with immediate reuse are explored in the 
problems at the end of this chapter.
A thread normally runs in user mode, but when it makes a system call it
switches to kernel mode and continues to run as the same thread with the same
properties and limits it had in user mode. Each thread has two stacks, one for use
