SEC. 1.5
OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS
47
The user can specify that standard output be redirected to a file, for example,
date >file
Similarly, standard input can be redirected, as in
sor t <file1 >file2
which invokes the sort program with input taken from file1 and output sent to file2.
The output of one program can be used as the input for another program by
connecting them with a pipe. Thus
cat file1 file2 file3 | sort >/dev/lp
invokes the cat program to concatenate three files and send the output to sort to
arrange all the lines in alphabetical order. The output of sort is redirected to the file
/dev/lp, typically the printer.
If a user puts an ampersand after a command, the shell does not wait for it to
complete. Instead it just gives a prompt immediately. Consequently,
cat file1 file2 file3 | sort >/dev/lp &
starts up the sort as a background job, allowing the user to continue working 
normally while the sort is going on. The shell has a number of other interesting 
features, which we do not have space to discuss here. Most books on UNIX discuss
the shell at some length (e.g., Kochan and Wood, 2016; and Shotts, 2019).
Most personal computers these days use a GUI. In fact, the GUI is just a 
program running on top of the operating system, like a shell. In Linux systems, this
fact is made obvious because the user has a choice of multiple GUIs: Gnome, KDE
or even none at all (using a terminal window on X11). In Windows, replacing the
standard GUI desktop is not typically done.
1.5.7 Ontogeny Recapitulates Phylogeny
After Charles Darwin’s book On the Origin of the Species was published, the
German zoologist Ernst Haeckel stated that ‘‘ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny.’’
By this he meant that the development of an embryo (ontogeny) repeats (i.e., 
recapitulates) the evolution of the species (phylogeny). In other words, after 
fertilization, a human egg goes through stages of being a fish, a pig, and so on before 
turning into a human baby. Modern biologists regard this as a gross simplification, but
it still has a kernel of truth in it.
Something vaguely analogous has happened in the computer industry. Each
new species (mainframe, minicomputer, personal computer, handheld, embedded
computer, smart card, etc.) seems to go through the development that its ancestors
did, both in hardware and in software. We often forget that much of what happens
in the computer business and a lot of other fields is technology driven. The reason
the ancient Romans lacked automobiles is not that they enjoyed walking so much.
