SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
379
really tell whether cylinder 40 or cylinder 200 is closer to cylinder 39. On the
other hand, if the disk controller can accept multiple outstanding requests, it can
use these scheduling algorithms internally. In that case, the algorithms are still
valid, but one level down, inside the controller.
Error Handling
Disk manufacturers are constantly pushing the limits of the technology by
increasing linear bit densities. The IronWolf hard disk of our examples packs as
many a 2470 Kbits per inch on average. Recording that many bits per inch
requires an extremely uniform substrate and a very fine oxide coating. 
Unfortunately, it is not possible to manufacture a disk to such specifications without defects.
As soon as manufacturing technology has improved to the point where it is 
possible to operate flawlessly at such densities, disk designers will go to higher 
densities to increase the capacity. Doing so will probably reintroduce defects.
Manufacturing defects introduce bad sectors, that is, sectors that do not 
correctly read back the value just written to them. If the defect is very small, say, only
a few bits, it is possible to use the bad sector and just let the ECC correct the errors
ev ery time. If the defect is bigger, the error cannot be masked.
There are two general approaches to bad blocks: deal with them in the 
controller or deal with them in the operating system. In the former approach, before
the disk is shipped from the factory, it is tested and a list of bad sectors is written
onto the disk. For each bad sector, one of the spares is substituted for it.
There are two ways to do this substitution. In Fig. 5-24(a), we see a single
disk track with 30 data sectors and two spares. Sector 7 is defective. What the 
controller can do is remap one of the spares as sector 7 as shown in Fig. 5-24(b). The
other way is to shift all the sectors up one, as shown in Fig. 5-24(c). In both cases
the controller has to know which sector is which. It can keep track of this 
information through internal tables (one per track) or by rewriting the preambles to give
the remapped sector numbers. If the preambles are rewritten, the method of
Fig. 5-24(c) is more work (because 23 preambles must be rewritten) but ultimately
gives better performance because an entire track can still be read in one rotation.
Errors can also develop during normal operation after the drive has been
installed. The first line of defense upon getting an error that the ECC cannot handle
is to just try the read again. Some read errors are transient, that is, are caused by
specks of dust under the head and will go away on a second attempt. If the 
controller notices that it is getting repeated errors on a certain sector, it can switch to a
spare before the sector has died completely. In this way, no data are lost and the
operating system and user do not even notice the problem. Usually, the method of
Fig. 5-24(b) has to be used since the other sectors might now contain data. Using
the method of Fig. 5-24(c) would require not only rewriting the preambles, but
copying all the data as well.
