SEC. 8.2
MULTICOMPUTERS
563
can send a packet only by issuing a system call that traps to the kernel. The kernel
may have to copy the packets to its own memory both on output and on input, for
example, to avoid page faults while transmitting over the network. Also, the 
receiving kernel probably does not know where to put incoming packets until it has had a
chance to examine them. These fiv e copy steps are illustrated in Fig. 8-18.
If copies to and from RAM are the bottleneck, the extra copies to and from the
kernel may double the end-to-end delay and cut the throughput in half. To avoid
this performance hit, many multicomputers map the interface board directly into
user space and allow the user process to put the packets on the board directly, 
without the kernel being involved. While this approach definitely helps performance, it
introduces two problems.
First, what if several processes are running on the node and both need network
access to send packets? Which one gets the interface board in its address space?
Having a system call to map the board in and out of a virtual address space is
expensive, but if only one process gets the board, how do the other ones send 
packets? And what happens if the board is mapped into process A’s virtual address
space and a packet arrives for process B, especially if A and B have different 
owners, neither of whom wants to put in any effort to help the other?
One solution is to map the interface board into all processes that need it, but
then a mechanism is needed to avoid race conditions. For example, if A claims a
buffer on the interface board, and then, due to a time slice, B runs and claims the
same buffer, disaster results. Some kind of synchronization mechanism is needed,
but these mechanisms, such as mutexes, work only when the processes are 
assumed to be cooperating. In a shared environment with multiple users all in a hurry to
get their work done, one user might just lock the mutex associated with the board
and never release it. The conclusion here is that mapping the interface board into
user space really works well only when there is just one user process running on
each node unless special precautions are taken (e.g., different processes get 
different portions of the interface RAM mapped into their address spaces).
The second problem is that the kernel may well need access to the 
interconnection network itself, for example, to access the file system on a remote node.
Having the kernel share the interface board with any users is not a good idea. 
Suppose that while the board was mapped into user space, a kernel packet arrived. Or
suppose that the user process sent a packet to a remote machine pretending to be
the kernel. The conclusion is that the simplest design is to have two network 
interface boards, one mapped into user space for application traffic and one mapped
into kernel space for use by the operating system. Many multicomputers do 
precisely this.
On the other hand, newer network interfaces are frequently multiqueue, which
means that they hav e more than one buffer to support multiple users efficiently. For
instance, network cards can easily have 16 send and 16 receive queues, making
them virtualizable to many virtual ports. Better still, the card often supports core
affinity. Specifically, it has its own hashing logic to help steer each packet to a
