CHAP. 4  
PROBLEMS
333
21. Consider a 4-TB disk that uses 4-KB blocks and the free-list method. How many block
addresses can be stored in one block?
22. Free disk space can be kept track of using a free list or a bitmap. Disk addresses
require D bits. For a disk with B blocks, F of which are free, state the condition under
which the free list uses less space than the bitmap. For D having the value 16 bits,
express your answer as a percentage of the disk space that must be free.
23. The beginning of a free-space bitmap looks like this after the disk partition is first 
formatted: 1000 0000 0000 0000 (the first block is used by the root directory). The 
system always searches for free blocks starting at the lowest-numbered block, so after
writing file A, which uses six blocks, the bitmap looks like this: 1111 1110 0000 0000.
Show the bitmap after each of the following additional actions:
(a) File B is written, using fiv e blocks.
(b) File A is deleted.
(c) File C is written, using eight blocks.
(d) File B is deleted.
24. What would happen if the bitmap or free list containing the information about free disk
blocks was completely lost due to a crash? Is there any way to recover from this 
disaster, or is it bye-bye disk? Discuss your answers for UNIX and the FAT -16 file system
separately.
25. Oliver Owl’s night job at the university computing center is to change the tapes used
for overnight data backups. While waiting for each tape to complete, he works on 
writing his thesis that proves Shakespeare’s plays were written by extraterrestrial visitors.
His text processor runs on the system being backed up since that is the only one they
have. Is there a problem with this arrangement?
26. We discussed making incremental dumps in some detail in the text. In Windows it is
easy to tell when to dump a file because every file has an archive bit. This bit is 
missing in UNIX. How do UNIX backup programs know which files to dump?
27. Suppose that file 21 in Fig. 4-27 was not modified since the last dump. In what way
would the four bitmaps of Fig. 4-28 be different?
28. It has been suggested that the first part of each UNIX file be kept in the same disk
block as its i-node. What good would this do?
29. Consider Fig. 4-29. Is it possible that for some particular block number the counters in
both lists have the value 2? How should this problem be corrected?
30. The performance of a file system depends upon the cache hit rate (fraction of blocks
found in the cache). If it takes 1 msec to satisfy a request from the cache, but 40 msec
to satisfy a request if a disk read is needed, give a formula for the mean time required
to satisfy a request if the hit rate is h. Plot this function for values of h varying from 0
to 1.0.
31. For an external USB hard drive attached to a computer, which is more suitable: a 
writethrough cache or a block cache?
32. Consider an application where students’ records are stored in a file. The application
takes a student ID as input and subsequently reads, updates, and writes the 
correspond