726
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
further descendants). A process may also send a signal to all members of its 
process group with a single system call.
Signals are also used for other purposes. For example, if a process is doing
floating-point arithmetic, and inadvertently divides by 0 (something that 
mathematicians tend to frown upon), it gets a SIGFPE (floating-point exception) signal.
Some of the signals that are required by POSIX are listed in Fig. 10-5. Many
Linux systems have additional signals as well, but programs using them may not
be portable to other versions of Linux and UNIX in general.
Signal 
Cause
SIGABRT
Sent to abort a process and force a core dump
SIGALRM 
The alar m clock has gone off
SIGFPE 
A floating-point error has occurred (e.g., division by 0)
SIGHUP 
The telecommunications connection was lost
SIGILL 
The process has tried to execute an illegal instruction
SIGQUIT 
The user has hit the key requesting a core dump
SIGKILL 
Sent to kill a process (cannot be caught or ignored)
SIGPIPE 
The process has written to a pipe which has no readers
SIGSEGV 
The process has referenced an invalid memory address
SIGTERM 
Used to request that a process terminate gracefully
SIGUSR1 
Available for application-defined purposes
SIGUSR2 
Available for application-defined purposes
Figure 10-5. Some of the signals required by POSIX.
10.3.2 Process-Management System Calls in Linux
Let us now look at the Linux system calls dealing with process management.
The main ones are listed in Fig. 10-6. Fork is a good place to start the discussion.
The fork system call, supported also by other traditional UNIX systems, is the main
way to create a new process in Linux systems. (We will discuss another alternative
in the following section.) It creates an exact duplicate of the original process,
including all the file descriptors, registers, and everything else. After the fork, the
original process and the copy (the parent and child) go their separate ways. All the
variables have identical values at the time of the fork, but since the entire parent
address space is copied to create the child, subsequent changes in one of them do
not affect the other. The fork call returns a value, which is zero in the child, and
equal to the child’s PID in the parent. Using the returned PID, the two processes
can see which is the parent and which is the child.
In most cases, after a fork, the child will need to execute different code from
the parent. Consider the case of the shell. It reads a command from the terminal,
forks off a child process, waits for the child to execute the command, and then
