SEC. 1.7
OPERATING SYSTEM STRUCTURE
69
Machine 1
Machine 2
Machine 3
Machine 4
Client!
Kernel
File server!
Kernel
Process server!
Kernel
Terminal server!
Kernel
Message from!
client to server
Network
Figure 1-27. The client-server model over a network.
Increasingly many systems involve users at their home PCs as clients and large
machines elsewhere running as servers. In fact, much of the Web operates this
way. A PC sends a request for a Web page to the server and the Web page comes
back. This is a typical use of the client-server model in a network.
1.7.5 Virtual Machines
The initial releases of OS/360 were strictly batch systems. Nevertheless, many
360 users wanted to be able to work interactively at a terminal, so various groups,
both inside and outside IBM, decided to write timesharing systems for it. The
official IBM timesharing system, TSS/360, was delivered late, and when it finally
arrived it was so big and slow that few sites converted to it. It was eventually 
abandoned after its development had consumed some $50 million (Graham, 1970). But
a group at IBM’s Scientific Center in Cambridge, Massachusetts, produced a 
radically different system that IBM eventually accepted as a product. A linear 
descendant of it, called z/VM, is now widely used on IBM’s current mainframes, the
zSeries, which are heavily used in large corporate data centers, for example, as
e-commerce servers that handle hundreds or thousands of transactions per second
and use databases whose sizes run to millions of gigabytes.
VM/370
This system, originally called CP/CMS and later renamed VM/370 (Seawright
and MacKinnon, 1979), was based on an astute observation: a timesharing system
provides (1) multiprogramming and (2) an extended machine with a more 
convenient interface than the bare hardware. The essence of VM/370 is to completely
separate these two functions.
The heart of the system, called a virtual machine monitor, runs on the bare
hardware and does the multiprogramming, providing not one, but several virtual
machines to the next layer up, as shown in Fig. 1-28. However, unlike all other
operating systems, these virtual machines are not extended machines, with files
