908
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
The executive memory manager implements the demand-paged virtual 
memory architecture. It manages the mapping of virtual pages onto physical page
frames, the management of the available physical frames, and management of the
pagefile on disk used to back private instances of virtual pages that are no longer
loaded in memory. The memory manager also provides special facilities for large
server applications such as databases and programming language runtime 
components such as garbage collectors. We will study memory management later in this
chapter, in Sec. 11.5.
The cache manager optimizes the performance of I/O to the file system by
maintaining a cache of file-system pages in the kernel virtual address space. The
cache manager uses virtually addressed caching, that is, organizing cached pages
in terms of their location in their files. This differs from physical block caching, as
in UNIX, where the system maintains a cache of the physically addressed blocks of
the raw disk volume.
Cache management is implemented using mapped files. The actual caching is
performed by the memory manager. The cache manager need be concerned only
with deciding what parts of what files to cache, ensuring that cached data is
flushed to disk in a timely fashion, and managing the kernel virtual addresses used
to map the cached file pages. If a page needed for I/O to a file is not available in
the cache, the page will be faulted in using the memory manager. We will study the
cache manager in Sec. 11.6.
The security reference monitor enforces Windows’ elaborate security 
mechanisms, which support the international standards for computer security called
Common Criteria, an evolution of United States Department of Defense Orange
Book security requirements. These standards specify a large number of rules that a
conforming system must meet, such as authenticated login, auditing, zeroing of
allocated memory, and many more. One rules requires that all access checks be
implemented by a single module within the system. In Windows, this module is the
security reference monitor in the kernel. We will study the security system in more
detail in Sec. 11.10.
The executive contains a number of other components that we will briefly
describe. The configuration manager is the executive component which 
implements the registry, as described earlier. The registry contains configuration data for
the system in file-system files called hives. The most critical hive is the SYSTEM
hive which is loaded into memory every time the system is booted from disk. Only
after the executive layer has successfully initialized all of its key components,
including the I/O drivers that talk to the system disk, is the in-memory copy of the
hive reassociated with the copy in the file system. Thus, if something bad happens
while trying to boot the system, the on-disk copy very unlikely to be corrupted. If
the on-disk copy were to be corrupted, that would be a disaster.
The local procedure call component provides for a highly efficient interprocess
communication used between processes running on the same system. It is one of
the data transports used by the standards-based remote procedure call facility to
