SEC. 10.2
OVERVIEW OF LINUX
717
head 20 file
is perfectly legal, and tells head to first print the initial 10 lines of a file called 20,
and then print the initial 10 lines of a second file called file. Most Linux 
commands accept multiple flags and arguments.
To make it easy to specify multiple file names, the shell accepts magic 
characters, sometimes called wild cards. An asterisk, for example, matches all possible
strings, so
ls *.c
tells ls to list all the files whose name ends in .c. If files named x.c, y.c, and z.c all
exist, the above command is equivalent to typing
ls x.c y.c z.c
Another wild card is the question mark, which matches any one character. A list of
characters inside square brackets selects any of them, so
ls [ape]*
lists all files beginning with ‘‘a’’, ‘‘p’’, or ‘‘e’’.
A program like the shell does not have to open the terminal (keyboard and
monitor) in order to read from it or write to it. Instead, when it (or any other 
program) starts up, it automatically has access to a file called standard input (for
reading), a file called standard output (for writing normal output), and a file 
called standard error (for writing error messages). Normally, all three default to the
terminal, so that reads from standard input come from the keyboard and writes to
standard output or standard error go to the screen. Many Linux programs read from
standard input and write to standard output as the default. For example,
sor t
invokes the sort program, which reads lines from the terminal (until the user types
a CTRL-D, to indicate end of file), sorts them alphabetically, and writes the result
to the screen.
It is also possible to redirect standard input and standard output, as that is often
useful. The syntax for redirecting standard input uses a less-than symbol (<) 
followed by the input file name. Similarly, standard output is redirected using a 
greater-than symbol (>). It is permitted to redirect both in the same command. For
example, the command
sor t <in >out
causes sort to take its input from the file in and write its output to the file out.
Since standard error has not been redirected, any error messages go to the screen.
A program that reads its input from standard input, does some processing on it, and
writes its output to standard output is called a filter.
