400
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
The ERASE character allows the user to rub out the character just typed. It is
usually the backspace (CTRL-H). It is not added to the character queue but instead
removes the previous character from the queue. It should be echoed as a sequence
of three characters, backspace, space, and backspace, in order to remove the 
previous character from the screen. If the previous character was a tab, erasing it
depends on how it was processed when it was typed. If it is immediately expanded
into spaces, some extra information is needed to determine how far to back up. If
the tab itself is stored in the input queue, it can be removed and the entire line just
output again. In most systems, backspacing will only erase characters on the 
current line. It will not erase a carriage return and back up into the previous line.
When the user notices an error at the start of the line being typed in, it is often
convenient to erase the entire line and start again. The KILL character erases the
entire line. Most systems make the erased line vanish from the screen, but a few
older ones echo it plus a carriage return and line feed because some users like to
see the old line. Consequently, how to echo KILL is a matter of taste. As with
ERASE it is usually not possible to go further back than the current line. When a
block of characters is killed, it may or may not be worth the trouble for the driver
to return buffers to the pool, if one is used.
Sometimes the ERASE or KILL characters must be entered as ordinary data.
The LNEXT character serves as an escape character. In UNIX CTRL-V is the
default. As an example, older UNIX systems often used the @ sign for KILL, but
the Internet mail system uses addresses of the form linda@cs.washington.edu.
Someone who feels more comfortable with older conventions might redefine KILL
as @, but then need to enter an @ sign literally to address email. This can be done
by typing CTRL-V @. The CTRL-V itself can be entered literally by typing
CTRL-V twice consecutively. After seeing a CTRL-V, the driver sets a flag saying
that the next character is exempt from special processing. The LNEXT character
itself is not entered in the character queue.
To allow users to stop a screen image from scrolling out of view, control codes
are provided to freeze the screen and restart it later. In UNIX these are STOP,
(CTRL-S) and START, (CTRL-Q), respectively. They are not stored but are used to
set and clear a flag in the keyboard data structure. Whenever output is attempted,
the flag is inspected. If it is set, no output occurs. Usually, echoing is also 
suppressed along with program output.
It is often necessary to kill a runaway program being debugged. The INTR
(DEL) and QUIT (CTRL-\) characters can be used for this purpose. In UNIX,
DEL sends the SIGINT signal to all the processes started up from that keyboard.
Implementing DEL can be quite tricky because UNIX was designed from the
beginning to handle multiple users at the same time. Thus, in the general case,
there may be many processes running on behalf of many users, and the DEL key
must signal only the user’s own processes. The hard part is getting the information
from the driver to the part of the system that handles signals, which, after all, has
not asked for this information.
