SEC. 4.4
FILE-SYSTEM MANAGEMENT AND OPTIMIZATION
317
Furthermore, some blocks, such as i-node blocks, are rarely referenced two
times within a short interval. These considerations lead to a modified LRU scheme,
taking two factors into account:
1. Is the block likely to be needed again soon?
2. Is the block essential to the consistency of the file system?
For both questions, blocks can be divided into categories such as i-node blocks,
indirect blocks, directory blocks, full data blocks, and partially full data blocks.
Blocks that will probably not be needed again soon go on the front, rather than the
rear of the LRU list, so their buffers will be reused quickly. Blocks that might be
needed again soon, such as a partly full block that is being written, go on the end
of the list, so they will stay around for a long time.
The second question is independent of the first one. If the block is essential to
the file-system consistency (basically, everything except data blocks), and it has
been modified, it should be written to disk immediately, reg ardless of which end of
the LRU list it is put on. By writing critical blocks quickly, we greatly reduce the
probability that a crash will wreck the file system. While a user may be unhappy if
one of his files is ruined in a crash, he is likely to be far more unhappy if the whole
file system is lost.
Even with this measure to keep the file-system integrity intact, it is undesirable
to keep data blocks in the cache too long before writing them out. Consider the
plight of someone who is using a personal computer to write a book. Even if our
writer periodically tells the editor to write the file being edited to the disk, there is
a good chance that everything will still be in the cache and nothing on the disk. If
the system crashes, the file-system structure will not be corrupted, but a whole
day’s work will be lost.
This situation need not happen often before we have a fairly unhappy user.
Systems take two approaches to dealing with it. The UNIX way is to have a 
system call, sync, which forces all the modified blocks out onto the disk immediately.
When the system is started up, a program, usually called update, is started up in
the background to sit in an endless loop issuing sync calls, sleeping for 30 sec
between calls. As a result, no more than 30 seconds of work is lost due to a crash.
Although Windows now has a system call equivalent to sync, called 
FlushFileBuffers, in the past it did not. Instead, it had a different strategy that was in some
ways better than the UNIX approach (and in some ways worse). What it did was
to write every modified block to disk as soon as it was written to the cache. Caches
in which all modified blocks are written back to the disk immediately are called
write-through caches. They require more disk I/O than nonwrite-through caches.
The difference between these two approaches can be seen when a program
writes a 1-KB block full, one character at a time. UNIX will collect all the 
characters in the cache and write the block out once every 30 seconds, or whenever the
block is removed from the cache. With a write-through cache, there is a disk access
