SEC. 4.4
FILE-SYSTEM MANAGEMENT AND OPTIMIZATION
307
When a user attempts to log in, the system examines the quota file to see if the
user has exceeded the soft limit for either number of files or number of disk blocks.
If either limit has been violated, a warning is displayed, and the count of warnings
remaining is reduced by one. If the count ever gets to zero, the user has ignored
the warning one time too many, and is not permitted to log in. Getting permission
to log in again will require some discussion with the system administrator.
This method has the property that users may go above their soft limits during a
login session, provided they remove the excess before logging out. The hard limits
may never be exceeded.
4.4.2 File-System Backups
Destruction of a file system is often a far greater disaster than destruction of a
computer. If a computer is destroyed by fire, lightning surges, or a cup of coffee
poured onto the keyboard, it is annoying and will cost money, but generally a
replacement can be purchased with a minimum of fuss. Inexpensive personal 
computers can even be replaced within an hour by just going to a computer store
(except at universities, where issuing a purchase order takes three committees, fiv e
signatures, and 90 days).
If a computer’s file system is irrevocably lost, whether due to hardware or 
software failures, restoring all the information will be difficult, time consuming, and in
many cases, impossible. For the people whose programs, documents, tax records,
customer files, databases, marketing plans, or other data are gone forever, the 
consequences can be catastrophic. While the file system cannot offer any protection
against physical destruction of the equipment and media, it can help protect the
information. It is pretty straightforward: make backups. But that is not quite as
simple as it sounds. Let us take a look.
Most people do not think making backups of their files is worth the time and
effort—until one fine day their disk abruptly dies, at which time most of them
undergo an instantaneous change of heart. Companies, however, (usually) well
understand the value of their data and generally do a backup at least once a day, to
a large disk or even good old-fashioned tape. Tape is still very cost efficient, 
costing less than $10/TB; no other medium comes close to that price. For companies
with petabytes or exabytes of data, cost of the backup medium matters. 
Nevertheless, making backups is not quite as trivial as it sounds, so we will examine some
of the related issues below.
Backups are generally made to handle one of two potential problems:
1. Recover from disaster
2. Recover from user mistakes
The first one covers getting the computer running again after a disk crash, fire,
flood, or some other natural catastrophe. In practice, these things do not happen
