670
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
(a)
(b)
Client
Server
Collaborator
Kernel
Kernel
Encapsulated server
Covert!
channel
Figure 9-23. (a) The client, server, and collaborator processes. (b) The 
encapsulated server can still leak to the collaborator via covert channels.
The collaborator can try to detect the bit stream by carefully monitoring its
response time. In general, it will get better response when the server is sending a 0
than when the server is sending a 1. This communication channel is known as a
covert channel, and is illustrated in Fig. 9-23(b).
Of course, the covert channel is a noisy channel, containing a lot of extraneous
information, but information can be reliably sent over a noisy channel by using an
error-correcting code (e.g., a Hamming code, or even something more 
sophisticated). The use of an error-correcting code reduces the already low bandwidth of
the covert channel even more, but it still may be enough to leak substantial 
information. It is fairly obvious that no protection model based on a matrix of objects
and domains is going to prevent this kind of leakage.
Modulating the CPU usage is not the only covert channel. The paging rate can
also be modulated (many page faults for a 1, no page faults for a 0). In fact, almost
any way of degrading system performance in a clocked way is a candidate. If the
system provides a way of locking files, then the server can lock some file to 
indicate a 1, and unlock it to indicate a 0. On some systems, it may be possible for a
process to detect the status of a lock even on a file that it cannot access. This covert
channel is illustrated in Fig. 9-24, with the file locked or unlocked for some fixed
time interval known to both the server and collaborator. In this example, the secret
bit stream 11010100 is being transmitted.
Locking and unlocking a prearranged file, S, is not an especially noisy channel,
but it does require fairly accurate timing unless the bit rate is very low. The
reliability and performance can be increased even more using an acknowledgement
protocol. This protocol uses two more files, F1 and F2, locked by the server and
collaborator, respectively, to keep the two processes synchronized. After the server
locks or unlocks S, it flips the lock status of F1 to indicate that a bit has been sent.
As soon as the collaborator has read out the bit, it flips F2’s lock status to tell the
server it is ready for another bit and waits until F1 is flipped again to indicate that
another bit is present in S. Since timing is no longer involved, this protocol is fully
