1094
READING LIST AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
CHAP. 13
Burow et al., ‘‘Control-Flow Integrity: Precision, Security, and Performance,’’
Since the introduction as a research result in 2005, CFI has gradually gained
ground and most modern compiler frameworks now support in one way or another.
This immediately points out an issue: there are many different forms of CFI. This
paper surveys the different approaches.
Jover, ‘‘Security Analysis of SMS as a Second Factor of Authentication’’
We explained how multiple factors can be used to provide authentication.
Often service providers opt for using SMS text messages as the second factor. This
article shows that doing so often has many security problems.
Bratus et al., ‘‘From Buffer Overflows to Weird Machines and Theory of Comput.’’
Connecting the humble buffer overflow to Alan Turing. The authors show that
hackers program vulnerable programs like weird machines with strange-looking
instruction sets. In doing so, they come full circle to Turing’s seminal research on
‘‘What is computable?’’
Greenberg, Sandworm
A fascinating account of a devastating cyberattack on NAT O, American utility
companies, and electric grids in Europe, where the attack seemed to originate in
Russia. The story has the feel of a spy movie from the cold war era.
Hafner and Markoff, Cyberpunk
Three compelling tales of young hackers breaking into computers around the
world are told here by the New York Times computer reporter who broke the 
Internet worm story (Markoff).
Sasse, ‘‘Red-Eye Blink, Bendy Shuffle, and the Yuck Factor: A User Experience of
Biometric Airport Systems’’
The author discusses his experiences with the iris recognition system used at a
number of large airports. Not all of them are positive.
Xiong and Szefer, ‘‘Survey of Transient Execution Attacks and Their Mitigations’’
The new vulnerabilities in hardware as exemplified by Spectre and Meltdown
cause major grief for operating systems and users alike. In this survey, the authors
provide an overview of the different attacks and mitigations related to this 
fascinating (and still new) class of vulnerabilities.
13.1.10 Case Study 1: UNIX, Linux, and Android
Bovet and Cesati, Understanding the Linux Kernel
The Linux community is very encouraging to newcomers who want to get their
hands dirty in the bowels of the kernel and there tutorials and helpful blogs
