598
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
subject line. Subscription is done by telling a tuple daemon process on the same
machine that monitors published tuples what subjects to look for.
Publish/subscribe is implemented as illustrated in Fig. 8-37. When a process
has a tuple to publish, it broadcasts it out onto the local LAN. The tuple daemon
on each machine copies all broadcasted tuples into its RAM. It then inspects the
subject line to see which processes are interested in it, forwarding a copy to each
one that is. Tuples can also be broadcast over a wide area network or the Internet
by having one machine on each LAN act as an information router, collecting all
published tuples and then forwarding them to other LANs for rebroadcasting. This
forwarding can also be done intelligently, forwarding a tuple to a remote LAN only
if that remote LAN has at least one subscriber who wants the tuple. Doing this
requires having the information routers exchange information about subscribers.
Information router
Daemon
Consumer
LAN
Producer
WAN
Figure 8-37. The publish/subscribe architecture.
Various kinds of semantics can be implemented, including reliable delivery
and guaranteed delivery, even in the presence of crashes. In the latter case, it is
necessary to store old tuples in case they are needed later. One way to store them is
to hook up a database system to the system and have it subscribe to all tuples. This
can be done by wrapping the database system in an adapter, to allow an existing
database to work with the publish/subscribe model. As tuples come by, the adapter
captures all of them and puts them in the database.
The publish/subscribe model fully decouples producers from consumers, as
does Linda. However, sometimes it is useful to know who else is out there. This
information can be acquired by publishing a tuple that basically asks: ‘‘Who out
there is interested in x?’’ Responses come back in the form of tuples that say: ‘‘I
am interested in x.’’
8.4 RESEARCH ON MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
Research on multicores, multiprocessors, and distributed systems is extremely
popular. Besides the direct problems of mapping operating system functionality on
a system consisting of multiple processing cores, there are many open research
