516
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
Virtual Hardware (front end)
Back end
1 virtual x86 CPU, with the same
instruction set extensions as the 
underlying hardware CPU
Up to 512 MB of contiguous DRAM
Multiplexed
Emulated
PCI Bus
Scheduled by the host operating system on
either a uniprocessor or multiprocessor host
Allocated and managed by the host OS
(page-by-page)
Fully emulated compliant PCI bus
Virtual disks (stored as files) or direct access
to a given raw device
ISO image or emulated access to the real
CD-ROM
Physical floppy or floppy image
Ran in a window and in full-screen mode.
SVGA required VMware SVGA guest driver
4x IDE disks
7x Buslogic SCSI Disks
1x IDE CD-ROM
2x 1.44 MB floppy drives
1x VMware graphics card with VGA
and SVGA support
2x serial ports COM1 and COM2
1x printer (LPT)
1x keyboard (104-key)
1x PS-2 mouse
3x AMD Lance Ethernet cards
1x Soundblaster
Connect to host serial port or a file
Can connect to host LPT port
Fully emulated; keycode events are 
generated when they are received by the VMware
application
Same as keyboard
Bridge mode and host-only modes
Fully emulated
Figure 7-9. Virtual hardware configuration options of the early VMware
Workstation, ca. 2000.
network connectivity to the host’s physical network. Ironically, VMware kept 
supporting the PCnet device long after physical Lance boards were no longer 
available, and actually achieved I/O that was orders of magnitude faster than 10 Mbps
(Sugerman et al., 2001). For storage devices, the original front ends were an IDE
controller and a Buslogic Controller, and the back end was typically either a file in
the host file system, such as a virtual disk or an ISO 9660 image, or a raw resource
such as a drive partition or the physical CD-ROM.
Splitting front ends from back ends had another benefit: a VMware virtual
machine could be copied from computer to another computer, possibly with 
different hardware devices. Yet, the virtual machine would not have to install new 
device drivers since it only interacted with the front-end component. This attribute,
called hardware-independent encapsulation, has a huge benefit today in server
environments and in cloud computing. It enabled subsequent innovations such as
suspend/resume, checkpointing, and the transparent migration of live virtual
machines across physical boundaries (Nelson et al., 2005). In the cloud, it allows
