578
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
node’s load is below some threshold value, the new process is sent there (Eager et
al., 1986). If not, another machine is chosen for probing. Probing does not go on
forever. If no suitable host is found within N probes, the algorithm terminates and
the process runs on the originating machine. The idea is for heavily loaded nodes
to try to get rid of excess work, as shown in Fig. 8-25(a), which depicts 
sender-initiated load balancing.
I’m full
Here, have a process
Take some work
I’m overloaded
Help !
(a)
(b)
I have nothing to do
Yawn
I’m bored
I’m free tonight
Need help ?
Figure 8-25. (a) An overloaded node looking for a lightly loaded node to hand
off processes to. (b) An empty node looking for work to do.
Eager et al. constructed an analytical queueing model of this algorithm. Using
this model, it was established that the algorithm behaves well and is stable under a
wide range of parameters, including various threshold values, transfer costs, and
probe limits.
Nevertheless, it should be observed that under conditions of heavy load, all
machines will constantly send probes to other machines in a futile attempt to find
one that is willing to accept more work. Few processes will be off-loaded, but 
considerable overhead may be incurred in the attempt to do so.
A Receiver-Initiated Distributed Heuristic Algorithm
A complementary algorithm to the one discussed above, which is initiated by
an overloaded sender, is one initiated by an underloaded receiver, as shown in
Fig. 8-25(b). With this algorithm, whenever a process finishes, the system checks
to see if it has enough work. If not, it picks some machine at random and asks it
for work. If that machine has nothing to offer, a second, and then a third machine
is asked. If no work is found with N probes, the node temporarily stops asking,
does any work it has queued up, and tries again when the next process finishes. If
no work is available, the machine goes idle. After some fixed time interval, it
begins probing again. Having the idle server do the work of probing is best.
