SEC. 6.7
OTHER ISSUES
467
6.7.3 Livelock
In some situations, a process tries to be polite by giving up the locks it already
acquired whenever it notices that it cannot obtain the next lock it needs. Then it
waits a millisecond, say, and tries again. In principle, this is good and should help
to detect and avoid deadlock. However, if the other process does the same thing at
exactly the same time, they will be in the situation of two people trying to pass
each other on the street when both of them politely step aside, and yet no progress
is possible, because they keep stepping the same way at the same time.
Consider an atomic primitive try lock in which the calling process tests a
mutex and either grabs it or returns failure. In other words, it never blocks. 
Programmers can use it together with acquire lock which also tries to grab the lock,
but blocks if the lock is not currently available. Now imagine a pair of processes
running in parallel (perhaps on different cores) that use two resources, as shown in
Fig. 6-19. Each one needs two resources and uses the try lock primitive to try to
acquire the necessary locks. If the attempt fails, the process gives up the lock it
holds and tries again. In Fig. 6-19, process A runs and acquires resource 1, while
process 2 runs and acquires resource 2. Next, they try to acquire the other lock and
fail. To be polite, they giv e up the lock they are currently holding and try again.
This procedure repeats until a bored user (or some other entity) puts one of these
processes out of its misery. Clearly, no process is blocked and we could even say
that things are happening, so this is not a deadlock. Still, no progress is possible, so
we do have something equivalent: a livelock.
Livelock and deadlock can occur in surprising ways. In some systems, the
total number of processes allowed is determined by the number of entries in the
process table. Thus, process-table slots are finite resources. If a fork fails because
the table is full, a reasonable approach for the program doing the fork is to wait a
random time and try again.
Now suppose that a UNIX system has 100 process slots. Ten programs are
running, each of which needs to create 12 children. After each process has created
9 processes, the 10 original processes and the 90 new processes have exhausted the
table. Each of the 10 original processes now sits in an endless loop forking and
failing—a livelock. The probability of this happening is minuscule, but it could
happen. Should we abandon processes and the fork call to eliminate the problem?
The maximum number of open files is similarly restricted by the size of the 
inode table, so a similar problem occurs when it fills up. Swap space on the disk is
another limited resource. In fact, almost every table in the operating system
represents a finite resource. Should we abolish all of these because it might 
happen that a collection of n processes might each claim 1/n of the total, and then each
try to claim another one? Probably not a good idea.
Most operating systems, including UNIX and Windows, basically just ignore
the problem on the assumption that most users would prefer an occasional livelock
(or even deadlock) to a rule restricting all users to one process, one open file, and
