SEC. 8.2
MULTICOMPUTERS
561
path has been set up, the bits are pumped all the way from the source to the 
destination nonstop as fast as possible. There is no intermediate buffering at the 
intervening switches. Circuit switching requires a setup phase, which takes some time,
but is faster once the setup has been completed. After the packet has been sent, the
path must be torn down again. A variation on circuit switching, called wormhole
routing, breaks each packet up into subpackets and allows the first subpacket to
start flowing even before the full path has been built.
Network Interfaces
All the nodes in a multicomputer have either a plug-in board containing the
node’s connection to the interconnection network that holds the multicomputer
together or a network chip on the mother board that does the same thing. The way
these boards (and chips) are built and how they connect to the main CPU and RAM
have substantial implications for the operating system. We will now briefly look at
some of the issues here.
In virtually all multicomputers, the interface board contains substantial RAM
for holding outgoing and incoming packets. Usually, an outgoing packet has to be
copied to the interface board’s RAM before it can be transmitted to the first switch.
The reason for this design is that many interconnection networks are synchronous,
so that once a packet transmission has started, the bits must continue flowing at a
constant rate. If the packet is in the main RAM, this continuous flow out onto the
network cannot be guaranteed due to other traffic on the memory bus. Using a 
dedicated RAM on the interface board eliminates this problem. This design is shown
in Fig. 8-18.
CPU
CPU
CPU
CPU
Switch
Node 2
Main RAM
Main RAM
Node 4
Interface
board
Optional
on- board
CPU
Interface
board
RAM
Node 3
Main RAM
Main RAM
Node 1
3
2
1
4
5
User
OS
Figure 8-18. Position of the network interface boards in a multicomputer.
The same problem occurs with incoming packets. The bits arrive from the 
network at a constant and often extremely high rate. If the network interface board
cannot store them in real time as they arrive, data will be lost. Again here, trying to
