SEC. 11.3
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
899
These procedures read and write unsigned 8-, 16-, and 32-bit integers, respectively,
to the specified port. It is up to the hardware abstraction layer to decide whether
memory-mapped I/O is needed here. In this way, a driver can be moved without
modification between machines that differ in the way the device registers are
implemented.
Drivers frequently need to access specific I/O devices for various purposes. At
the hardware level, a device has one or more addresses on a certain bus. Since
modern computers often have multiple buses (PCIe, USB, IEEE 1394, etc.), it can
happen that more than one device may have the same address on different buses, so
some way is needed to distinguish them. The HAL provides a service for 
identifying devices by mapping bus-relative device addresses onto systemwide logical
addresses. In this way, drivers do not have to keep track of which device is 
connected to which bus. This mechanism also shields higher layers from properties of
alternative bus structures and addressing conventions.
Interrupts have a similar kind of problem—they are also bus dependent. Here,
too, the HAL provides services to name interrupts in a systemwide way and also
provides ways to allow drivers to attach interrupt service routines to interrupts in a
portable way, without having to know anything about which interrupt vector is for
which bus. Interrupt request level management is also handled in the HAL.
Another HAL service is setting up and managing DMA transfers in a 
deviceindependent way. Both the systemwide DMA engine and DMA engines on 
specific I/O cards can be handled. Devices are referred to by their logical addresses.
The HAL implements software scatter/gather (writing or reading from 
noncontiguous blocks of physical memory).
The HAL also manages clocks and timers in a portable way. Time is kept track
of in units of 100 nanoseconds starting at midnight at the start of Jan. 1, 1601,
which is the first date in the previous quadricentury, which simplifies leap-year
computations. (Quick Quiz: Was 1800 a leap year? Quick Answer: No. QQ2: Was
2000 a leap year? QA2: Yes. Until 3999, century years are not leap years except
400 years). Under the current rules, 4000 should be a leap year, but in the current
model isn’t quite right and making 4000 a nonleap year would help. Not everyone
agrees however. The time services decouple the drivers from the actual 
frequencies at which the clocks run.
Kernel components sometimes need to synchronize at a very low lev el, 
especially to prevent race conditions in multiprocessor systems. The HAL provides
primitives to manage this synchronization, such as spin locks, in which one CPU
simply waits for a resource held by another CPU to be released, particularly in
situations where the resource is typically held only for a few machine instructions.
Finally, after the system has been booted, the HAL talks to the computer’s
firmware (BIOS or UEFI) and inspects the system configuration to find out which
buses and I/O devices the system contains and how they hav e been configured.
This information is then put into the registry. A brief summary of some of the
things the HAL does is given in Fig. 11-12.
