894
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
actually modifying hive files. This approach ensures consistency with minimal
overhead and allows recovery of registry data in the face of system crashes or 
power outages.
11.3 SYSTEM STRUCTURE
In the previous sections, we examined Windows as seen by the programmer
writing code for user mode. Now we are going to look under the hood to see how
the system is organized internally, what the various components do, and how they
interact with each other and with user programs. This is the part of the system
seen by the programmer implementing low-level user-mode code, like subsystems
and native services, as well as the view of the system provided to device-driver
writers.
Although there are many books on how to use Windows, there are fewer on
how it works inside. One of the best places to look for additional information on
this topic is Microsoft Windows Internals, 7th ed. Part 1 (Yosifovich et al, 2017)
and Microsoft Windows Internals, 7th ed. Part 2. (Allievi et al., 2021).
11.3.1 Operating System Structure
As described earlier, the Windows operating system consists of many layers, as
depicted in Fig. 11-4. In the following sections, we will dig into the lowest levels
of the operating system: those that run in kernel mode. The central layer is the
NTOS kernel itself, which is loaded from ntoskrnl.exe when Windows boots.
NTOS itself consists of two layers, the executive, which containa most of the 
services, and a smaller layer which is (also) called the kernel and implements the
underlying thread scheduling and synchronization abstractions (a kernel within the
kernel?), as well as implementing trap handlers, interrupts, and other aspects of
how the CPU is managed.
The division of NTOS into kernel and executive is a reflection of NT’s
VAX/VMS roots. The VMS operating system, which was also designed by Cutler,
had four hardware-enforced layers: user, supervisor, executive, and kernel 
corresponding to the four protection modes provided by the VAX processor architecture.
The Intel CPUs also support four rings of protection, but some of the early target
processors for NT did not, so the kernel and executive layers represent a 
software-enforced abstraction, and the functions that VMS provides in supervisor
mode, such as printer spooling, are provided by NT as user-mode services.
The kernel-mode layers of NT are shown in Fig. 11-11. The kernel layer of
NTOS is shown above the executive layer because it implements the trap and 
interrupt mechanisms used to transition from user mode to kernel mode.
The uppermost layer in Fig. 11-11 is the system library (ntdll.dll), which 
actually runs in user mode. The system library includes a number of support functions
