874
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
markets, where UNIX was the dominant operating system. Microsoft was also 
concerned that the Intel microprocessor family might not continue to be competitive,
as it was already being challenged by RISC architectures. To address these issues,
Microsoft recruited a group of engineers from DEC (Digital Equipment 
Corporation) led by Dave Cutler, one of the key designers of DEC’s VMS operating system
(among others). Cutler was chartered to develop a brand-new 32-bit operating 
system that was intended to implement OS/2, the operating system API that Microsoft
was jointly developing with IBM at the time. The original design documents by
Cutler’s team called the system NT OS/2.
Cutler’s system was called NT (New Technology) (and also because the 
original target processor was the new Intel 860, code-named the N10). NT was 
designed to be portable across different processors and emphasized security and
reliability, as well as compatibility with the MS-DOS-based versions of Windows.
Cutler’s background at DEC shows in various places, with there being more than a
passing similarity between the design of NT and that of VMS and other operating
systems designed by Cutler, shown in Fig. 11-2.
Year 
DEC operating system
Characteristics
1973 
RSX-11M
16-bit, multiuser, real-time, swapping
1978 
VAX/VMS 
32-bit, vir tual memor y
1987 
VAXELAN 
Real-time
1988 
PRISM/Mica
Canceled in favor of MIPS/Ultrix
Figure 11-2. DEC operating systems developed by Dave Cutler.
Programmers familiar only with UNIX find the architecture of NT to be quite
different. This is not just because of the influence of VMS, but also because of the
differences in the computer systems that were common at the time of design.
UNIX was first designed in the 1970s for single-processor, 16-bit, tiny-memory,
swapping systems where the process was the unit of concurrency and composition,
and fork/exec were inexpensive operations (since swapping systems frequently
copy processes to disk anyway). NT was designed in the early 1990s, when 
multiprocessor, 32-bit, multimegabyte, virtual memory systems were common. In NT,
threads are the units of concurrency, dynamic libraries are the units of composition,
and fork/exec are implemented by a single operation to create a new process and
run another program without first making a copy.
The first version of NT-based Windows (Windows NT 3.1) was released in
1993. It was called 3.1 to correspond with the then-current consumer Windows 3.1.
The joint project with IBM had foundered, so though the OS/2 interfaces were still
supported, the primary interfaces were 32-bit extensions of the Windows APIs,
called Win32. Between the time NT was started and first shipped, Windows 3.0
had been released and had become extremely successful commercially. It too was
able to run Win32 programs, but using the Win32s compatibility library.
