818
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
other processes to make calls to it. Tw o AIDL interfaces are involved here: one for
the service manager and one for the package manager. For example, Fig. 10-50
shows the basic AIDL description for the service manager; it contains the 
getService method, which other processes use to retrieve the IBinder of system service
interfaces like the package manager.
package android.os
interface IServiceManager {
IBinder getService(Str ing name);
void addService(Str ing name, IBinder binder);
}
Figure 10-50. Basic service manager AIDL interface.
10.8.8 Android Applications
Android provides an application model that is very different from a typical
command-line environment in the Linux shell or even applications launched from a
graphical user interface such as Gnome or KDE.
An application is not an
executable file with a main entry point; it is a container of everything that makes
up that app: its code, graphical resources, declarations about what it is to the 
system, and other data.
An Android application by convention is a file with the apk extension, for
Android Package. This file is actually a normal zip archive, containing everything
about the application. The important contents of an apk are as follows:
1. A manifest describing what the application is, what it does, and how
to run it. The manifest must provide a package name for the 
application, a Java-style scoped string (such as com.android.app.calculator),
which uniquely identifies it.
2. Resources needed by the application, including strings it displays to
the user, XML data for layouts and other descriptions, graphical 
bitmaps, etc.
3. The code itself, which may be ART bytecode as well as native library
code.
4. Signing information, securely identifying the author.
The key part of the application for our purposes here is its manifest, which
appears as a precompiled XML file named AndroidManifest.xml in the root of the
apk’s zip namespace. A complete example manifest declaration for a hypothetical
email application is shown in Fig. 10-51: it allows you to view and compose emails
