SEC. 10.4
MEMORY MANAGEMENT IN LINUX
753
To alleviate this problem, Linux has a second memory allocator, the slab 
allocator, which takes chunks using the buddy algorithm but then carves slabs (smaller
units) from them and manages the smaller units separately.
Since the kernel frequently creates and destroys objects of certain type (e.g.,
task struct), it relies on so-called object caches. These caches consist of pointers
to one or more slab which can store a number of objects of the same type. Each of
the slabs may be full, partially full, or empty.
For instance, when the kernel needs to allocate a new process descriptor, that
is, a new task struct, it looks in the object cache for task structures, and first tries
to find a partially full slab and allocate a new task struct object there. If no such
slab is available, it looks through the list of empty slabs. Finally, if necessary, it
will allocate a new slab, place the new task structure there, and link this slab with
the task-structure object cache. The kmalloc kernel service, which allocates 
physically contiguous memory regions in the kernel address space, is in fact built on top
of the slab and object cache interface described here.
A third memory allocator, vmalloc, is also available and is used when the
requested memory needs to be contiguous only in virtual space, not in physical
memory. In practice, this is true for most of the requested memory. One exception
consists of devices, which live on the other side of the memory bus and the 
memory management unit, and therefore do not understand virtual addresses. However,
the use of vmalloc results in some performance degradation, and it is used 
primarily for allocating large amounts of contiguous virtual address space, such as for
dynamically inserting kernel modules. All these memory allocators are derived
from those in System V.
Virtual Address-Space Representation
The virtual address space is divided into homogeneous, contiguous, 
pagealigned areas or regions. That is to say, each area consists of a run of consecutive
pages with the same protection and paging properties. The text segment and 
mapped files are examples of areas (see Fig. 10-13). There can be holes in the virtual
address space between the areas. Any memory reference to a hole results in a fatal
page fault. The page size is fixed, for example, 4 KB for the Pentium and 8 KB for
the Alpha. Starting with the Pentium, support for page frames of 4 MB was added.
On recent 64-bit architectures, Linux can support huge pages of 2 MB or 1 GB
each. In addition, in a PAE (Physical Address Extension) mode, which is used on
certain 32-bit architectures to increase the process address space beyond 4 GB,
page sizes of 2 MB are supported.
Each area is described in the kernel by a vm area struct entry. All the
vm area structs for a process are linked together in a list sorted on virtual address
so that all the pages can be found. When the list gets too long (more than 32
entries), a tree is created to speed up searching it. The vm area struct entry lists
the area’s properties. These properties include the protection mode (e.g., read only
