SEC. 8.3
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
587
computers communicate is called a protocol. Many protocols exist, including
router-router protocols, host-host protocols, and others. For a thorough treatment of
computer networks and their protocols, see Computer Networks, 6/e (Tanenbaum
et al., 2020).
All modern networks use what is called a protocol stack to layer different 
protocols on top of one another. At each layer, different issues are dealt with. For
example, at the bottom level protocols define how to tell where in the bit stream a
packet begins and ends. At a higher level, protocols deal with how to route packets
through complex networks from source to destination. And at a still higher level,
they make sure that all the packets in a multipacket message have arrived correctly
and in the proper order.
Since most distributed systems use the Internet as a base, the key protocols
these systems use are the two major Internet protocols: IP and TCP. IP (Internet
Protocol) is a datagram protocol in which a sender injects a datagram of up to 64
KB into the network and hopes that it arrives. No guarantees are given. The 
datagram may be fragmented into smaller packets as it passes through the Internet.
These packets travel independently, possibly along different routes. When all the
pieces get to the destination, they are assembled in the correct order and delivered.
Tw o versions of IP are currently in use, v4 and v6. At the moment, v4 still
dominates, so we will describe that here, but v6 is up and coming. Each v4 packet
starts with a 40-byte header that contains a 32-bit source address and a 32-bit 
destination address among other fields. These are called IP addresses and form the
basis of Internet routing. They are conventionally written as four decimal numbers
in the range 0–255 separated by dots, as in 192.31.231.65. When a packet arrives
at a router, the router extracts the IP destination address and uses that for routing.
Since IP datagrams are not acknowledged, IP alone is not sufficient for reliable
communication in the Internet. To provide reliable communication, another 
protocol, TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), is usually layered on top of IP. TCP
uses IP to provide connection-oriented streams. To use TCP, a process first 
establishes a connection to a remote process. The process required is specified by the IP
address of a machine and a port number on that machine, to which processes 
interested in receiving incoming connections listen. Once that has been done, it just
pumps bytes into the connection and they are guaranteed to come out the other end
undamaged and in the correct order. The TCP implementation achieves this 
guarantee by using sequence numbers, checksums, and retransmissions of incorrectly
received packets. All of this is transparent to the sending and receiving processes.
They just see reliable interprocess communication, just like a UNIX pipe.
To see how all these protocols interact, consider the simplest case of a very
small message that does not need to be fragmented at any lev el. The host is on an
Ethernet connected to the Internet. What happens exactly? The user process 
generates the message and makes a system call to send it on a previously established
TCP connection. The kernel protocol stack adds a TCP header and then an IP
header to the front. of the message. Then it goes to the Ethernet driver, which adds
