SEC. 11.5
MEMORY MANAGEMENT
975
and the PTE associated with the page is updated with pagefile index and offset
exactly as it is done for a regular pagefile write. When pages in the virtual pagefile
are modified or freed and corresponding pagefile space marked free, a system
thread called the store eviction thread is notified to evict the corresponding keys
from store manager via SmPageEvict. One difference between regular pagefiles
and the store manager virtual pagefile is that whereas clean pages faulted into
working sets are not removed from regular pagefiles, they are evicted from the
store manager to avoid keeping both the uncompressed and the compressed copy of
the page in memory.
As indicated in Fig. 11-38, the store manager can manage multiple stores. A
system store is created at boot time as the default store for modified pages. 
Additional, per-process stores can also be created for individual processes. In practice,
this is done for UWP applications. The store manager picks the appropriate store
for an incoming modified page based on the owning process.
When the store manager initializes at boot time, it creates the 
MemCompression system process which provides the user-mode address space for all stores to
allocate their backing memory into which incoming pages are compressed. This
backing store is regular private pageable memory, allocated with a variant of Vir 
tualAlloc. As such, the memory manager may choose to trim these pages from the
MemCompression process working set or a store may decide to explicitly remove
them. Once removed, these pages go to the modified list as usual, but since they
are coming from the MemCompression process, and thus, are already compressed,
the memory manager writes them directly to the pagefile. That’s why, when 
memory compression is enabled, all writes to the pagefile contain compressed data from
the MemCompression process.
We mentioned above how UWP applications get their own stores rather than
using the system store. This is done to optimize the working set in-swap operation
we described earlier. When a per-process store is present, the out-swap proceeds
normally at UWP application suspend time except that no pagefile reservation is
made. This is because the pages will go to the store manager virtual pagefile and
sequentiality is not important since the allocated offsets are only used to construct
keys to associate with pages. Later, when the UWP process working set is emptied
due to memory pressure, all pages are compressed into the per-process store.
At this point, the compressed pages of the per-process store are out-swapped,
reserving sequential space in the swapfile. If memory pressure continues, these
compressed pages may be explicitly emptied or trimmed from the 
MemCompression process working set, get written out to the pagefile and remain cached on the
standby list or leave memory. When the UWP application is about to be resumed,
during working set in-swap, the system carefully choreographs disk read and
decompression operations to maximize parallelism and efficiency. First, a store 
inswap is kicked off to bring the compressed pages belonging to the store into the
MemCompression process working set from the swapfile using large, sequential
I/Os. Of course, if the compressed pages never left memory (which is very likely),
