290
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
The problem with symbolic links is the extra overhead required. The file 
containing the path must be read, then the path must be parsed and followed, 
component by component, until the i-node is reached. All of this activity may require a
considerable number of extra disk accesses. Furthermore, an extra i-node is needed
for each symbolic link, as is an extra disk block to store the path, although if the
path name is short, the system could store it in the i-node itself, as a kind of 
optimization. Symbolic links have the advantage that they can be used to link to files
on machines anywhere in the world, by simply providing the network address of
the machine where the file resides in addition to its path on that machine.
There is also another problem introduced by links, symbolic or otherwise.
When links are allowed, files can have two or more paths. Programs that start at a
given directory and find all the files in that directory and its subdirectories will
locate a linked file multiple times. For example, a program that dumps all the files
in a directory and its subdirectories onto a backup drive may make multiple copies
of a linked file. Furthermore, if the backup drive is then read into another machine,
unless the dump program is clever, the linked file may be copied twice onto the
disk, instead of being linked.
4.3.5 Log-Structured File Systems
Changes in technology are putting pressure on current file systems. Let us 
consider computers with (magnetic) hard disks. In the next section, we will look at
SSDs. In systems with hard disks, the CPUs keep getting faster, the disks are
becoming much bigger and cheaper (but not much faster), and memories are 
growing exponentially in size. The one parameter that is not improving by leaps and
bounds is disk seek time.
The combination of these factors led to a performance bottleneck in file 
systems. Research done at Berkeley attempted to alleviate this problem by designing a
completely new kind of file system, LFS (the Log-structured File System). In this
section, we will briefly describe how LFS works. For a more complete treatment,
see the original paper on LFS (Rosenblum and Ousterhout, 1991).
The idea that drove the LFS design is that as CPUs get faster and RAM 
memories get larger, disk caches are also increasing rapidly. Consequently, it is now 
possible to satisfy a very substantial fraction of all read requests directly from the
file-system cache, with no disk access needed. It follows from this observation
that in the future, most disk accesses will be writes, so the read-ahead mechanism
used in some file systems to fetch blocks before they are needed no longer gains
much performance.
To make matters worse, in most file systems, writes are done in very small
chunks. Small writes are highly inefficient, since a 50-µsec disk write is often 
preceded by a 10-msec seek and a 4-msec rotational delay. With these parameters,
disk efficiency drops to a fraction of 1%.
