488
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
a branch. By definition, a basic block contains no jump, call, trap, return, or other
instruction that alters the flow of control, except for the very last instruction which
does precisely that. Just prior to executing a basic block, the hypervisor first scans
it to see if it contains sensitive instructions (in the Popek and Goldberg sense), and
if so, replaces them with a call to a hypervisor procedure that handles them. The
branch on the last instruction is also replaced by a call into the hypervisor (to make
sure it can repeat the procedure for the next basic block). Dynamic translation and
emulation sound expensive, but typically are not. Translated blocks are cached, so
no translation is needed in the future. Also, most code blocks do not contain 
sensitive or privileged instructions and thus can execute natively. In particular, as long
as the hypervisor configures the hardware carefully (as is done, for instance, by
VMware), the binary translator can ignore all user processes; they execute in 
nonprivileged mode anyway.
After a basic block has completed executing, control is returned to the 
hypervisor, which then locates its successor. If the successor has already been translated,
it can be executed immediately. Otherwise, it is first translated, cached, then 
executed. Eventually, most of the program will be in the cache and run at close to
full speed. Various optimizations are used, for example, if a basic block ends by
jumping to (or calling) another one, the final instruction can be replaced by a jump
or call directly to the translated basic block, eliminating all overhead associated
with finding the successor block. Again, there is no need to replace sensitive 
instructions in user programs; the hardware will just ignore them anyway.
On the other hand, it is common to perform binary translation on all the guest
operating system code running in ring 1 and replace even the privileged sensitive
instructions that, in principle, could be made to trap also. The reason is that traps
are very expensive and binary translation leads to better performance.
So far we have described a type 1 hypervisor. Although type 2 hypervisors are
conceptually different from type 1 hypervisors, they use, by and large, the same
techniques. For instance, VMware ESX Server (a type 1 hypervisor first shipped in
2001) used exactly the same binary translation as the first VMware Workstation (a
type 2 hypervisor released two years earlier).
However, to run the guest code natively and use exactly the same techniques
requires the type 2 hypervisor to manipulate the hardware at the lowest level,
which cannot be done from user space. For instance, it has to set the segment
descriptors to exactly the right value for the guest code. For faithful virtualization,
the guest operating system should also be tricked into thinking that it is the true
and only operating system, with full control of all the machine’s resources and
with access to the entire address space (4 GB on 32-bit machines). When the guest
operating system finds another system (the host kernel) squatting in its address
space, first one will not be amused.
Unfortunately, this is exactly what happens when the guest runs as a user 
process on a regular operating system. For instance, in Linux a user process has access
to just 3 GB of the 4-GB address space, as the remaining 1 GB is reserved for the
