SEC. 11.10
VIRTUALIZATION IN WINDOWS
1015
Figure 11-53. The contents of the VHD exposed to the container is backed by a
set of host directories that are merged at runtime to make up the container file
system contents.
the request to shut down the machine reaches the kernel and if the request 
originated in a container, the kernel terminates the container rather the shutting down
the host. A container can also be shut down if a critical process within the 
container crashes. This would normally result in a host blue screen, but if the critical
process was in a container, the container will be terminated rather than causing a
blue screen.
Hyper-V Isolated Containers
Server Silos provide a high degree of isolation based on namespace isolation.
Microsoft advertises these containers as being suitable for enterprise multitenancy
or non-hostile workloads. However, there are times when it is desirable to run 
hostile workloads within a container. For those scenarios, Hyper-V isolated 
containers are the solution. These containers leverage hardware-based virtualization
mechanism to provide a very secure boundary between the container and its host.
One of the primary design goals of Windows Containers was to not require an
administrator to decide upfront what type of container to use. The same artifacts
should be usable with either a Windows Server Container or a Hyper-V Isolated
Container. The approach taken was to always run a server silo for the container, but
in some cases, it is run on the host (Windows Server Containers) and in others, it is
run within something known as a Utility VM (Hyper-V Isolated Containers). The
Utility VM is created as a VA-backed VM to optimize memory usage and to allow
in memory sharing of container base image binaries across running containers
which significantly improves density.
The utility VM also runs a very scaled down OS instance, designed to host
nothing other than server silos so that it boots quickly and uses minimal memory.
When the Hyper-V isolated container is instantiated, the Utility VM is started first.
