615
friends how clever you were (and the authors will neither confirm nor deny rumors
that they engaged in such activities in their younger days). Nowadays, however,
this is no longer the only or even the most important reason to break into a system.
There are many different types of attackers with different kinds of motivation.
These include theft, hacktivism, vandalism, terrorism, cyberwarfare, espionage,
spam, extortion, fraud—and occasionally the attacker still simply wants to show
off, or expose the poor security of an organization.
Attackers similarly range from not very skilled beginners who want to be
cybercriminals but have not learned the ropes yet, to extremely skillful crackers.
They may be professionals working for criminals, governments (e.g., the police,
the military, or the secret services), or security firms—or hobbyists that do all their
hacking in their spare time. It should be clear that trying to keep a hostile foreign
government from stealing military secrets is quite a different matter from trying to
keep students from inserting a funny message-of-the-day into the system. The
amount of effort needed for security and protection clearly depends on who the
enemy is thought to be.
Going back to the attack tools, it may come as a surprise that many of them are
developed by white hats. The explanation is that, while the baddies may (and do)
use them also, these tools primarily serve as convenient means to test the security
of a computer system or network. For instance, a fuzzer is a software testing tool
that throws unexpected and/or invalid inputs at programs to see if the program
hangs or crashes—evidence of bugs that should be fixed. Some fuzzers can only be
used on simple user programs, but others explicitly target the operating system. A
good example is Google’s syzkaller which semi-randomly executes system calls
with crazy combinations of arguments to trigger bugs in the kernel. Fuzzers may
be used by developers to test their own code or corporate users to test the software
they hav e purchased, but also by crackers who look for vulnerabilities that allow
them to compromise the system. A tool that is useful for attackers as well as
defenders is known as dual use. There are many examples of such tools.
However, cybercriminals also offer a wide range of (often online) services to
wannabe cyber crooks who want to spread malware, launder money, redirect 
traffic, provide hosting with a no-questions-asked policy, and many other things that
fit in the perceived business model. Most criminal activities on the Internet build
on infrastructures known as botnets that consist of thousands (and sometimes 
millions) of compromised computers—often normal computers of innocent and 
ignorant users. There are all-too-many ways in which attackers can compromise a
user’s machine. While the hackers in movies typically ‘‘hack into’’ the system by
exploiting some minuscule weakness in the victim’s defenses with great genius
(whatever that means), the reality may be more prosaic. For instance, they may
guess the password, because ‘‘letmein’’ or ‘‘password’’ turn out to be less secure
than many people think. The opposite also happens. Some users pick very 
complicated passwords, so that they cannot remember them, and have to write them down
on a Post-it note which they attach to their screen or keyboard. This way, anyone
SEC. 9.1
FUNDAMENTALS OF OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
