502
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
Likewise, different clouds offer different things. Some give their users access to
physical hardware, but most virtualize their environments. Some offer the bare
machines, virtual or not, and nothing more, but others offer software that is ready
to use and can be combined in interesting ways, or platforms that make it easy for
their users to develop new services. Cloud providers typically offer different 
categories of resources, such as ‘‘big machines’’ versus ‘‘little machines.’’
For all the talk about clouds, few people seem really sure about what they are
exactly. The National Institute of Standards and Technology, always a good source
to fall back on, lists fiv e essential characteristics:
1. On-demand self-service.
Users should be able to provision
resources automatically, without requiring human interaction.
2. Broad network access. All these resources should be available over
the network via standard mechanisms so that heterogeneous devices
can make use of them.
3. Resource pooling. The computing resource owned by the provider
should be pooled to serve multiple users and with the ability to assign
and reassign resources dynamically. The users generally do not even
know the exact location of ‘‘their’’ resources or even which country
they are located in.
4. Rapid elasticity.
It should be possible to acquire and release
resources elastically, perhaps even automatically, to scale 
immediately with the users’ demands.
5. Measured service. The cloud provider meters the resources used in a
way that matches the type of service agreed upon.
7.9.1 Clouds as a Service
In this section, we will look at clouds with a focus on virtualization and 
operating systems. Specifically, we consider clouds that offer direct access to a virtual
machine, which the user can use in any way he sees fit. Thus, the same cloud may
run different operating systems, possibly on the same hardware. In cloud terms,
this is known as IAAS (Infrastructure As A Service), as opposed to PAAS 
(Platform As A Service, which delivers an environment that includes things such as a
specific OS, database, Web server, and so on), SAAS (Software As A Service),
which offers access to specific software, such as Microsoft Office 365, or Google
Apps), FAAS (Function As A Service), which helps you deploy applications to
the cloud, and many other types of as-a-service. One example of an IAAS cloud is
Amazon AWS, which happens to be based on the Xen hypervisor and counts 
multiple hundreds of thousands of physical machines. Provided you have the cash, you
can have as much computing power as you need.
