514
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
with the identical instruction. This is possible only because the VMware VMM (of
which the binary translator is a component) has previously configured the 
hardware to match the exact specification of the virtual machine: (a) the VMM uses
shadow page tables, which ensures that the memory management unit can be used
directly (rather than emulated) and (b) the VMM uses a similar shadowing
approach to the segment descriptor tables (which played a big role in the 16-bit and
32-bit software running on older x86 operating systems).
There are, of course, complications and subtleties. One important aspect of the
design is to ensure the integrity of the virtualization sandbox, that is, to ensure that
no software running inside the virtual machine (including malicious software) can
tamper with the VMM. This problem is generally known as software fault 
isolation and adds run-time overhead to each memory access if the solution is 
implemented in software. Here also, the VMware VMM uses a different, hardware-based
approach. It splits the address space into two disjoint zones. The VMM reserves
for its own use the top 4 MB of the address space. This frees up the rest (that is,
4 GB < 4 MB, since we are talking about a 32-bit architecture) for the use by the
virtual machine. The VMM then configures the segmentation hardware so that no
virtual machine instructions (including ones generated by the binary translator) can
ev er access the top 4-MB region of the address space.
A Guest Operating System Centric Strategy
Ideally, a VMM should be designed without worrying about the guest 
operating system running in the virtual machine, or how that guest operating system 
configures the hardware. The idea behind virtualization is to make the virtual machine
interface identical to the hardware interface so that all software that runs on the
hardware will also run in a virtual machine. Unfortunately, this approach is 
practical only when the architecture is virtualizable and simple. In the case of x86, the
overwhelming complexity of the architecture was clearly a problem.
The VMware engineers simplified the problem by focusing only on a selection
of supported guest operating systems. In its first release, VMware Workstation 
supported officially only Linux, Windows 3.1, Windows 95/98, and Windows NT as
guest operating systems. Over the years, new operating systems were added to the
list with each revision of the software. Nevertheless, the emulation was good
enough that it ran some unexpected operating systems, such as MINIX 3, perfectly,
right out of the box.
This simplification did not change the overall design—the VMM still provided
a faithful copy of the underlying hardware, but it helped guide the development
process. In particular, engineers had to worry only about combinations of features
that were used in practice by the supported guest operating systems.
For example, the x86 architecture contains four privilege rings in protected
mode (ring 0 to ring 3) but no operating system uses ring 1 or ring 2 in practice
(save for OS/2, a long-dead operating system from IBM). So rather than figure out
