SEC. 1.6
SYSTEM CALLS
57
most systems, there are other memory areas also, for instance those create with the
mmap system call, which creates a new virtual memory areas, but we will get to
those later.)
Address (hex)
FFFF
0000
Stack
Data
Text
Gap
Figure 1-20. Processes have three segments: text, data, and stack.
1.6.2 System Calls for File Management
Many system calls relate to the file system. In this section, we will look at
calls that operate on individual files; in the next one we will examine those that
involve directories or the file system as a whole.
To read or write a file, it must first be opened. This call specifies the file name
to be opened, either as an absolute path name or relative to the working directory,
as well as a code of O RDONLY, O WRONLY, or O RDWR, meaning open for
reading, writing, or both. To create a new file, the O CREAT parameter is used.
The file descriptor returned can then be used for reading or writing. Afterward, the
file can be closed by close, which makes the file descriptor available for reuse on a
subsequent open.
The most heavily used calls are undoubtedly read and wr ite. We saw read 
earlier. Wr ite has the same parameters.
Although most programs read and write files sequentially, for some 
applications programs need to be able to access any part of a file at random. Associated
with each file is a pointer that indicates the current position in the file. When 
reading (writing) sequentially, it normally points to the next byte to be read (written).
The lseek call changes the value of the position pointer, so that subsequent calls to
read or wr ite can begin anywhere in the file.
Lseek has three parameters: the first is the file descriptor for the file, the 
second is a file position, and the third tells whether the file position is relative to the
beginning of the file, the current position, or the end of the file. The value returned
by lseek is the absolute position in the file (in bytes) after changing the pointer.
For each file, UNIX keeps track of the file mode (regular file, special file,
directory, and so on), size, time of last modification, and other information. 
Programs can ask to see this information via the stat system call. The first parameter
