250
MEMORY MANAGEMENT 
CHAP. 3
3.9 SUMMARY
In this chapter, we hav e examined memory management. We saw that the 
simplest systems do not swap or page at all. Once a program is loaded into memory, it
remains there in place until it finishes. Some operating systems allow only one
process at a time in memory, while others support multiprogramming. This model
is still common in small, embedded real-time systems.
The next step up is swapping. When swapping is used, the system can handle
more processes than it has room for in memory. Processes for which there is no
room are swapped out to the disk or SSD. Free space in memory and on 
nonvolatile storage can be kept track of with a bitmap or a hole list.
Modern computers often have some form of virtual memory. In the simplest
form, each process’ address space is divided up into uniform-sized blocks called
pages, which can be placed into any available page frame in memory. There are
many page replacement algorithms; two of the better algorithms are aging and
WSClock.
To make paging systems work well, choosing an algorithm is not enough;
attention to such issues as determining the working set, memory allocation policy,
and page size is required.
Segmentation helps in handling data structures that can change size during
execution and simplifies linking and sharing. It also facilitates providing different
protection for different segments. Sometimes segmentation and paging are 
combined to provide a two-dimensional virtual memory. The MULTICS system and the
32-bit Intel x86 support segmentation and paging. Still, it is clear that few 
operating system developers care deeply about segmentation (because they are married to
a different memory model).
PROBLEMS
1. The IBM 360 had a scheme of locking 2-KB blocks by assigning each one a 4-bit key
and having the CPU compare the key on every memory reference to the 4-bit key in the
PSW. Name two drawbacks of this scheme not mentioned in the text.
2. In Fig. 3-3 the base and limit registers contain the same value, 16,384. Is this just an
accident, or are they always the same? If it is not an accident, why are they the same in
this example?
3. A swapping system eliminates holes by compaction. Assuming a random distribution
of many holes and many data segments and a time to read or write a 32-bit memory
word of 4 nsec, about how long does it take to compact 4 GB? For simplicity, assume
