140
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
were reversed in order, so mutex was decremented before empty instead of after it.
If the buffer were completely full, the producer would block, with mutex set to 0.
Consequently, the next time the consumer tried to access the buffer, it would do a
down on mutex, now 0, and block too. Both processes would stay blocked forever
and no more work would ever be done. This unfortunate situation is called a 
deadlock. We will study deadlocks in detail in Chap. 6.
This problem is pointed out to show how careful you must be when using 
semaphores. One subtle error and everything comes to a grinding halt. It is like 
programming in assembly language, only worse, because the errors are race 
conditions, deadlocks, and other forms of unpredictable and irreproducible behavior.
To make it easier to write correct programs, Brinch Hansen (1973) and Hoare
(1974) proposed a higher-level synchronization primitive called a monitor. Their
proposals differed slightly, as described below. A monitor is a collection of 
procedures, variables, and data structures that are all grouped together in a special kind
of module or package. Processes may call the procedures in a monitor whenever
they want to, but they cannot directly access the monitor’s internal data structures
from procedures declared outside the monitor. Figure 2-34 illustrates a monitor
written in an imaginary language, Pidgin Pascal. C cannot be used here because
monitors are a language concept and C does not have them.
monitor example
integer i;
condition c;
procedure producer( );
...
end;
procedure consumer( );
.
.
.
end;
end monitor;
Figure 2-34. A monitor.
Monitors have an important property that makes them useful for achieving
mutual exclusion: only one process can be active in a monitor at any instant. 
Monitors are a programming-language construct, so the compiler knows they are special
and can handle calls to monitor procedures differently from other procedure calls.
Typically, when a process calls a monitor procedure, the first few instructions of
the procedure will check to see if any other process is currently active within the
monitor. If so, the calling process will be suspended until the other process has left
the monitor. If no other process is using the monitor, the calling process may enter.
