SEC. 10.4
MEMORY MANAGEMENT IN LINUX
751
entry in the middle page directory points to the final page table, which is indexed
by the page field of the virtual address. The entry found here points to the page
needed. On the Pentium, which uses two-level paging, each page’s upper and 
middle directories have only one entry, so the global directory entry effectively
chooses the page table to use. Similarly, three-level paging can be used when 
needed, by setting the size of the upper page directory field to zero. Starting with the
4.14 kernel, fiv e-level page tables are also supported, to leverage the x86-64 
hardware extensions originally introduced in the Intel Ice Lake processors.
Global directory
Upper directory
Middle directory
Page
Offset
Page
Page table
Page middle!
directory
Page upper!
directory
Page global!
directory
Virtual!
address
Figure 10-16. Linux uses four-level page tables.
Physical memory is used for various purposes. The kernel itself is fully 
hardwired; no part of it is ever paged out. The rest of memory is available for user
pages, the paging cache, and other purposes. The page cache holds pages 
containing file blocks that have recently been read or have been read in advance in
expectation of being used in the near future, or pages of file blocks which need to
be written to disk, such as those which have been created from user-mode 
processes which have been swapped out to disk. It is dynamic in size and competes for
the same pool of pages as the user processes. The paging cache is not really a 
separate cache, but simply the set of user pages that are no longer needed and are 
waiting around to be paged out. If a page in the paging cache is reused before it is
evicted from memory, it can be reclaimed quickly.
In addition, Linux supports dynamically loaded modules, most often device
drivers. These can be of arbitrary size and each one must be allocated a contiguous
piece of kernel memory. As a direct consequence of these requirements, Linux
