SEC. 1.6
SYSTEM CALLS
61
Of course, Windows also has system calls. With UNIX, there is almost a 
oneto-one relationship between the system calls (e.g., read) and the library procedures
(e.g., read) used to invoke the system calls. In other words, for each system call,
there is roughly one library procedure that is called to invoke it, as indicated in
Fig. 1-17. Furthermore, POSIX has only on the order of 100 procedure calls.
With Windows, the situation is radically different. To start with, the library
calls and the actual system calls are highly decoupled. Microsoft has defined a set
of procedures called the WinAPI, Win32 API, or Win64 API (Application 
Programming Interface) that programmers are expected to use to get operating 
system services. This interface is (partially) supported on all versions of Windows
since Windows 95. By decoupling the API interface that programmer’s use from
the actual system calls, Microsoft retains the ability to change the actual system
calls in time (even from release to release) without invalidating existing programs.
What actually constitutes Win32 is also slightly ambiguous because recent 
versions of Windows have many new calls that were not previously available. In this
section, Win32 means the interface supported by all versions of Windows. Win32
provides compatibility among versions of Windows. Win64 is largely Win32 with
bigger pointers so we will focus on Win32 here.
The number of Win32 API calls is extremely large, numbering in the 
thousands. Furthermore, while many of them do invoke system calls, a substantial 
number are carried out entirely in user space. As a consequence, with Windows it is
impossible to see what is a system call (i.e., performed by the kernel) and what is
simply a user-space library call. In fact, what is a system call in one version of
Windows may be done in user space in a different version, and vice versa. When
we discuss the Windows system calls in this book, we will use the Win32 
procedures (where appropriate) since Microsoft guarantees that these will be stable over
time. But it is worth remembering that not all of them are true system calls (i.e.,
traps to the kernel).
The Win32 API has a huge number of calls for managing windows, geometric
figures, text, fonts, scrollbars, dialog boxes, menus, and other features of the GUI.
To the extent that the graphics subsystem runs in the kernel (true on some versions
of Windows but not on all), these are system calls; otherwise they are just library
calls. Should we discuss these calls in this book or not? Since they are not really
related to the function of an operating system, we have decided not to, even though
they may be carried out by the kernel. Readers interested in the Win32 API should
consult one of the many books on the subject (e.g., Yosifovich, 2020).
Even introducing all the Win32 API calls here is out of the question, so we will
restrict ourselves to those calls that roughly correspond to the functionality of the
UNIX calls listed in Fig. 1-18. These are listed in Fig. 1-23.
Let us now briefly go through the list of Fig. 1-23. CreateProcess creates a
new process. It does the combined work of fork and execve in UNIX. It has many
parameters specifying the properties of the newly created process. Windows does
not have a process hierarchy like UNIX does, so there is no concept of a parent
