SEC. 1.4
THE OPERATING SYSTEM ZOO
37
related; mainframe operating systems often perform all of them. An example
mainframe operating system is Z/OS, the successor of OS/390, which in turn was a
direct descendant of OS/360. However, mainframe operating systems are 
gradually being replaced by UNIX variants such as Linux.
1.4.2 Server Operating Systems
One level down are the server operating systems. They run on servers, which
are either very large personal computers, workstations, or even mainframes. They
serve multiple users at once over a network and allow the users to share hardware
and software resources. Servers can provide print service, file service, database 
service, or Web service. Internet providers run many server machines to support their
customers and Websites use servers to store the Web pages and handle the 
incoming requests. Typical server operating systems are Linux, FreeBSD, Solaris, and
the Windows Server family.
1.4.3 Personal Computer Operating Systems
The next category is the personal computer operating system. Modern ones all
support multiprogramming, often with dozens of programs started up at boot time,
and multiprocessor architectures. Their job is to provide good support to a single
user. They are widely used for word processing, spreadsheets, games, and Internet
access. Common examples are Windows 11, macOS, Linux, and FreeBSD. 
Personal computer operating systems are so widely known that probably little 
introduction is needed. In fact, many people are not even aware that other kinds exist.
1.4.4 Smartphone and Handheld Computer Operating Systems
Continuing on down to smaller and smaller systems, we come to tablets (like
Apple’s iPad), smartphones and other handheld computers. A handheld computer,
originally known as a PDA (Personal Digital Assistant), is a small computer that
can be held in your hand during operation. Smartphones and tablets are the 
bestknown examples. As we have already seen, this market is currently dominated by
Google’s Android and Apple’s iOS. Most of these devices boast multicore CPUs,
GPS, cameras and other sensors, copious amounts of memory, and sophisticated
operating systems. Moreover, all of them have more third-party applications (apps)
than you can shake a (USB) stick at. Google has over 3 million Android apps in
the Play Store and Apple has over 2 million in the App Store.
1.4.5 The Internet of Things and Embedded Operating Systems
The IOT (Internet of Things) comprises all the billions of physical objects
with sensors and actuators that are increasingly connected to the network, such as
fridges, thermostats, security camera’s motion sensors, and so on. All of these
