SEC. 11.8
THE WINDOWS NT FILE SYSTEM
991
among the components of the operating system in that much of its original design
took place aboard a sailboat out on the Puget Sound (following a strict protocol of
work in the morning, beer in the afternoon). Below we will examine a number of
features of NTFS, starting with its structure, then moving on to file-name lookup,
file compression, journaling, and file encryption.
File System Structure
Each NTFS volume (e.g., disk partition) contains files, directories, bitmaps,
and other data structures. Each volume is organized as a linear sequence of blocks
(clusters in Microsoft’s terminology), with the block size being fixed for each 
volume and ranging from 512 bytes to 64 KB, depending on the volume size. Most
NTFS disks use 4-KB blocks as a compromise between large blocks (for efficient
transfers) and small blocks (for low internal fragmentation). Blocks are referred to
by their offset from the start of the volume using 64-bit numbers.
The principal data structure in each volume is the MFT (Master File Table),
which is a linear sequence of fixed-size 1-KB records. Each MFT record describes
one file or one directory. It contains the file’s attributes, such as its name and 
timestamps, and the list of disk addresses where its blocks are located. If a file is
extremely large, it is sometimes necessary to use two or more MFT records to 
contain the list of all the blocks, in which case the first MFT record, called the base
record, points to the additional MFT records. This overflow scheme dates back to
CP/M, where each directory entry was called an extent. A bitmap keeps track of
which MFT entries are free.
The MFT is itself a file and as such can be placed anywhere within the volume,
thus eliminating the problem with defective sectors in the first track. Furthermore,
the file can grow as needed, up to a maximum size of 248 records.
The MFT is shown in Fig. 11-44. Each MFT record consists of a sequence of
(attribute header, value) pairs. Each attribute begins with a header telling which
attribute this is and how long the value is. Some attribute values are variable
length, such as the file name and the data. If the attribute value is short enough to
fit in the MFT record, it is placed there. If it is too long, it is placed elsewhere on
the disk and a pointer to it is placed in the MFT record. This makes NTFS very
efficient for small files, that is, those that can fit within the MFT record itself.
The first 16 MFT records are reserved for NTFS metadata files, as illustrated
in Fig. 11-45. Each record describes a normal file that has attributes and data
blocks, just like any other file. Each of these files has a name that begins with a
dollar sign to indicate that it is a metadata file. The first record describes the MFT
file itself. In particular, it tells where the blocks of the MFT file are located so that
the system can find the MFT file. Clearly, Windows needs a way to find the first
block of the MFT file in order to find the rest of the file-system information. The
way it finds the first block of the MFT file is to look in the boot block, where its
address is installed when the volume is formatted with the file system.
