SEC. 2.4 SYNCHRONIZATION AND INTERPROCESS COMMUNICATION
127
critical regions, the processes must call enter region and leave region at the 
correct times for the method to work. If one process cheats, the mutual exclusion will
fail. In other words, critical regions work only if the processes cooperate.
An alternative instruction to TSL is XCHG, which exchanges the contents of two
locations atomically, for example, a register and a memory word. The code is
shown in Fig. 2-26, and, as can be seen, is essentially the same as the solution with
TSL. All Intel x86 CPUs use XCHG instruction for low-level synchronization.
enter region:
MOVE REGISTER,#1
| put a 1 in the register
XCHG REGISTER,LOCK
| swap the contents of the register and lock var iable
CMP REGISTER,#0
| was lock zero?
JNE enter region 
| if it was non zero, lock was set, so loop
RET 
| retur n to caller; critical region entered
leave region:
MOVE LOCK,#0
| store a 0 in lock
RET 
| retur n to caller
Figure 2-26. Entering and leaving a critical region using the XCHG instruction.
2.4.4 Sleep and Wakeup
Both Peterson’s solution and the solutions using TSL or XCHG are correct, but
both have the defect of requiring busy waiting. In essence, what these solutions do
is this: when a process wants to enter its critical region, it checks to see if the entry
is allowed. If it is not, the process just sits in a tight loop burning the CPU while
waiting until it is.
Not only does this approach waste CPU time, but it can also have unexpected
effects. Consider a computer with two processes, H, with high priority, and L, with
low priority. The scheduling rules are such that H is run whenever it is in ready
state. At a certain moment, with L in its critical region, H becomes ready to run
(e.g., an I/O operation completes). H now begins busy waiting, but since L is never
scheduled while H is running, L never gets the chance to leave its critical region, so
H loops forever. This situation is sometimes referred to as a variant of the priority
inversion problem.
Now let us look at some interprocess communication primitives that block
instead of wasting CPU time when they are not allowed to enter their critical
regions. One of the simplest is the pair sleep and wakeup. Sleep is a system call
that causes the caller to block, that is, be suspended until another process wakes it
up. The wakeup call has one parameter, the process to be awakened. Alternatively,
both sleep and wakeup each have one parameter, a memory address used to match
up sleeps with wakeups.
