SEC. 11.11
SECURITY IN WINDOWS
1031
In kernel-mode, ACG guarantees are provided by HVCI 
(Hypervisor-enforced Code Integrity), which is a Virtualization-based Security component and lives
in the Secure Kernel. It leverages SLAT protections to enforce WˆX and code 
signing requirements for VTL1 kernel mode and for code that loads into IUM trustlets.
Windows 11 enables HVCI by default. When VBS is not enabled, a kernel 
component called PatchGuard is responsible for enforcing code integrity. With no VBS
and therefore no SLAT protection, it is not possible to deterministically prevent
attacks on code. PatchGuard relies on capturing hashes of pristine code pages and
verifying the hash at random times in the future. As such, it does not prevent code
modification, but will typically detect it over time, unless the attacker is able to
restore things back to their original state in time. In order to evade detection and
tamper, PatchGuard keeps itself hidden and its data structures obfuscated.
Attackers who possess an arbitrary read/write primitive do not always attack
code, or code-flow; they can also attack various data structures to gain execution or
change system behavior. For that reason, PatchGuard also verifies the integrity of
numerous kernel data structures, global variables, function pointers, and sensitive
processor registers which can be used to take control of the system. With VBS
enabled, HyperGuard, the VTL1 counterpart to PatchGuard is responsible for
maintaining the integrity of kernel data structures. Many of these data structures
can be protected deterministically via SLAT protections and secure intercepts that
can be configured to fire when VTL0 modifies sensitive processor registers. And
KCFG protects function pointers. Still, maintaining the integrity of writable data
structures like the list of processes or object type descriptors cannot easily be done
with SLAT protections, so even when HyperGuard is enabled, PatchGuard is still
active, albeit in a reduced functionality mode. Figure 11-58 summarizes the 
security facilities we have discussed.
Containing Damage
Despite all efforts to prevent exploits, it is possible (and likely) that malicious
intrusions will happen sooner or later. In the security world, it is not wise to rely on
a single layer of security. Damage containment mechanisms in Windows provide
additional defense-in-depth against attacks that are able to work around existing
mitigations. These are all the sandboxing mechanisms we have already covered in
this chapter:
1. AppContainers (Sec. 11.2.1)
2. Browser Sandbox (Sec. 11.11.3)
3. Microsoft Defender Application Guard (Sec. 11.10.2)
4. Windows Sandbox (Sec. 11.10.2)
5. IUM Trustlets (Sec. 11.10.3)
