496
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
maintaining the shadow page tables explicitly. With EPT, the hypervisor still has
an additional set of page tables, but now the CPU is able to handle much of the
intermediate level in hardware also. In our example, the hardware first walks the
‘‘regular’’ page tables to translate the guest virtual address to a guest physical
address, just as it would do without virtualization. The difference is that it also
walks the extended (or nested) page tables without software intervention to find the
host physical address, and it needs to do this every time a guest physical address is
accessed. The translation is illustrated in Fig. 7-7.
Level 1 offset
63
48 47
39 38
30 29
21 20
12 11
0
Level 2 offset
Level 3 offset
Level 4 offset
page offset
+
+
etc.
Guest pointer to
level 1 page table
Guest pointer to entry in
level 1 page table
Guest pointer to entry in
level 2 page table
Look up in nested page tables
Look up in nested page tables
Figure 7-7. Extended/nested page tables are walked every time a guest physical
address is accessed—including the accesses for each level of the guest’s page 
tables.
Unfortunately, the hardware may need to walk the nested page tables more 
frequently then you might think. Let us suppose that the guest virtual address was not
cached and requires a full page-table lookup. Every level in paging hierarchy
incurs a lookup in the nested page tables. In other words, the number of memory
references grows quadratically with the depth of the hierarchy. Even so, EPT 
dramatically reduces the number of VM exits. Hypervisors no longer need to map the
guest’s page table read only and can do away with shadow page-table handling.
Better still, when switching virtual machines, it just changes this mapping, the
same way an operating system changes the mapping when switching processes.
Reclaiming Memory
Having all these virtual machines on the same physical hardware all with their
own memory pages and all thinking they are the king of the mountain is great—
until we need the memory back. This is particularly important in the event of 
overcommitment of memory, where the hypervisor pretends that the total amount of
memory for all virtual machines combined is more than the total amount of real
