172
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
extremely common (Li et al., 2019). As we have seen, locking is not just hard, but
also expensive and operating systems have adopted RCU to avoid locking 
altogether (McKenney et al., 2013).
An active research area deals with recording and replaying a process’ 
execution (Viennot et al., 2013). Replaying helps developers track down hard-to-find
bugs and security experts to investigate incidents.
Speaking of security, a major event in 2018 was the disclosure of a series of
very serious security vulnerabilities in modern CPUs. They required changes
ev erywhere: hardware, firmware, operating system, and even applications. For this
chapter, the scheduling implications are especially relevant. For instance, Windows
adopted a scheduling algorithm to prevent code in different security domains from
sharing the same processor core (Microsoft, 2018).
Scheduling (both uniprocessor and multiprocessor) in general is still a topic
near and dear to the heart of some researchers. Some topics being researched
include scheduling in clusters for deep learning (Xiao et al., 2018), scheduling for
microservices (Sriraman, 2018), and schedulability (Yang et al., 2018). All in all,
processes, threads, and scheduling are not hot topics for research as they once
were. The research has moved on to topics like power management, virtualization,
clouds, and security.
2.7 SUMMARY
To hide the effects of interrupts, operating systems provide a conceptual model
consisting of sequential processes running in parallel. Processes can be created and
terminated dynamically. Each process has its own address space.
For some applications, it is useful to have multiple threads of control within a
single process. These threads are scheduled independently and each one has its
own stack, but all the threads in a process share a common address space. Threads
can be implemented in user space or in the kernel.
Alternatively, high-throughput servers may opt for an event-driven model
instead. Here, the server operates as a finite state machine that responds to events
and interacts with the operating system using non-blocking system calls.
Processes can synchronize with one another using synchronization and
interprocess communication primitives, for example, semaphores, monitors, or
messages. These primitives are used to ensure that no two processes are ever in
their critical regions at the same time, a situation that leads to chaos. A process can
be running, runnable, or blocked and can change state when it or another process
executes one of the interprocess communication primitives. Interthread 
communication is similar.
A great many scheduling algorithms have been studied. Some of these are 
primarily used for batch systems, such as shortest-job-first scheduling. Others are
common in both batch systems and interactive systems. These algorithms include
