630
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
mandatory access controls do is regulate the flow of information, to make sure that
it does not leak out in a way it is not supposed to. Not even if a malicious user
tries to leak it.
The Bell-LaPadula Model
The most widely used multilevel security model is the Bell-LaPadula model
so we will start there (Bell and LaPadula, 1973). This model was designed for
handling military security, but it is also applicable to other organizations. In the
military world, documents (objects) can have a security level, such as unclassified,
confidential, secret, and top secret. People are also assigned these levels, 
depending on which documents they are allowed to see. A general might be allowed to
see all documents, whereas a lieutenant might be restricted to documents cleared as
confidential and lower. A process running on behalf of a user acquires the user’s
security level. Since there are multiple security levels, this scheme is called a 
multilevel security system.
The Bell-LaPadula model has rules about how information can flow:
1. The simple security property: A process running at security level k
can read only objects at its level or lower. For example, a general can
read a lieutenant’s documents but a lieutenant cannot read a general’s
documents.
2. The * property: A process running at security level k can write only
objects at its level or higher. For example, a lieutenant can append a
message to a general’s mailbox telling everything he knows, but a
general cannot append a message to a lieutenant’s mailbox telling
ev erything she knows because the general may have seen top-secret
documents that may not be disclosed to a lieutenant.
Roughly summarized, processes can read down and write up, but not the reverse.
If the system rigorously enforces these two properties, it can be shown that no
information can leak out from a higher security level to a lower one. The * 
property was so named because in the original report, the authors could not think of a
good name for it and used * as a temporary placeholder until they could devise a
better name. They nev er did and the report was printed with the *. In this model,
processes read and write objects, but do not communicate with each other directly.
The Bell-LaPadula model is illustrated graphically in Fig. 9-11.
In this figure, a (solid) arrow from an object to a process indicates that the
process is reading the object, that is, information is flowing from the object to the
process. Similarly, a (dashed) arrow from a process to an object indicates that the
process is writing into the object, that is, information is flowing from the process to
the object. Thus all information flows in the direction of the arrows. For example,
process B can read from object 1 but not from object 3.
