588
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
an Ethernet header directing the packet to the router on the Ethernet. This router
then injects the packet into the Internet, as depicted in Fig. 8-31.
Internet
Ethernet 1!
header
Headers
Router
Message
Host
Ethernet
TCP
Message
IP
Figure 8-31. Accumulation of packet headers.
To establish a connection with a remote host (or even to send it a datagram), it
is necessary to know its IP address. Since managing lists of 32-bit IP addresses is
inconvenient for people, a scheme called DNS (Domain Name System) was
invented as a database that maps ASCII names for hosts onto their IP addresses.
Thus it is possible to use the DNS name star.cs.vu.nl instead of the corresponding
IP address 130.37.24.6. DNS names are commonly known because Internet email
addresses are of the form user-name@DNS-host-name.
This naming system
allows the mail program on the sending host to look up the destination host’s IP
address in the DNS database, establish a TCP connection to the mail daemon 
process there, and send the message as a file. The user-name is sent along to identify
which mailbox to put the message in.
8.3.3 Document-Based Middleware
Now that we have some background on networks and protocols, we can start
looking at different middleware layers that can overlay the basic network to 
produce a consistent paradigm for applications and users. We will start with a simple
but well-known example: the World Wide Web. The Web was invented by Tim
Berners-Lee at CERN, the European Nuclear Physics Research Center, in 1989 and
since then has spread like wildfire all over the world.
The original paradigm behind the Web was quite simple: every computer can
hold one or more documents, called Web pages. Each Web page contains text,
images, icons, sounds, movies, and the like, as well as hyperlinks (pointers) to
other Web pages. When a user requests a Web page using a program called a Web
browser, the page is displayed on the screen. Clicking on a link causes the current
page to be replaced on the screen by the page pointed to. Although many bells and
