SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
797
Finally, in August 2008, the software was stable and ready to ship. Builds
went to the factory and started being flashed onto devices. In September, Android
1.0 was launched on the Dream device, now called the T-Mobile G1.
Continued Development
After Android’s 1.0 release, development continued at a rapid pace. There
were about 15 major updates to the platform over the following 5 years, adding a
large variety of new features and improvements from the initial 1.0 release.
The original Compatibility Definition Document basically allowed only for
compatible devices that were very much like the T-Mobile G1. Over the following
years, the range of compatible devices would greatly expand. Key points of this
process were as follows:
1. During 2009, Android versions 1.5 through 2.0 introduced a soft
keyboard to remove a requirement for a physical keyboard, much
more extensive screen support (both size and pixel density) for 
lowerend QVGA devices and new larger and higher density devices like the
WVGA Motorola Droid, and a new ‘‘system feature’’ facility for 
devices to report what hardware features they support and applications
to indicate which hardware features they require. The latter is the key
mechanism Google Play uses to determine application compatibility
with a specific device.
2. During 2011, Android versions 3.0 through 4.0 introduced new core
support in the platform for 10-inch and larger tablets; the core 
platform now fully supported device screen sizes everywhere from small
QVGA phones, through smartphones and larger ‘‘phablets,’’ 7-inch
tablets and larger tablets to beyond 10 inches.
3. As the platform provided built-in support for more diverse hardware,
not only larger screens but also nontouch devices with or without a
mouse, many more types of Android devices appeared. This included
TV devices such as Google TV, gaming devices, notebooks, cameras,
etc.
Significant development work also went into something not as visible: a
cleaner separation of Google’s proprietary services from the Android open-source
platform.
For Android 1.0, a significant amount of work had been put into having a clean
third-party application API and an open-source platform with no dependencies on
proprietary Google code. However, the implementation of Google’s proprietary
code was often not yet cleaned up, having dependencies on internal parts of the
platform. Often the platform did not even hav e facilities that Google’s proprietary
