SEC. 1.3
COMPUTER HARDWARE REVIEW
31
systems work like this. The second way is to make an entry in an operating system
file telling it that it needs the driver and then reboot the system. At boot time, the
operating system goes and finds the drivers it needs and loads them. Older versions
of Windows work this way. The third way is for the operating system to be able to
accept new drivers while running and install them on the fly without the need to
reboot. This way used to be rare but is becoming much more common now. 
Hotpluggable devices, such as USB and Thunderbolt devices (discussed below),
always need dynamically loaded drivers.
Every controller has a small number of registers that are used to communicate
with it. For example, a minimal disk controller might have registers for specifying
the disk address, memory address, sector count, and direction (read or write). To
activate the controller, the driver gets a command from the operating system, then
translates it into the appropriate values to write into the device registers. The 
collection of all the device registers forms the I/O port space, a subject we will come
back to in Chap. 5.
On some computers, the device registers are mapped into the operating 
system’s address space (the addresses it can use), so they can be read and written like
ordinary memory words. On such computers, no special I/O instructions are
required and user programs can be kept away from the hardware by not putting
these memory addresses within their reach (e.g., by using base and limit registers).
On other computers, the device registers are put in a special I/O port space, with
each register having a port address. On these machines, special IN and OUT
instructions are available in kernel mode to allow drivers to read and write the 
registers. The former scheme eliminates the need for special I/O instructions but uses
up some of the address space. The latter uses no address space but requires special
instructions. Both systems are widely used.
Input and output can be done in three different ways. In the simplest method, a
user program issues a system call, which the kernel then translates into a procedure
call to the appropriate driver. The driver then starts the I/O and sits in a tight loop
continuously polling the device to see if it is done (usually there is some bit that
indicates that the device is still busy). When the I/O has completed, the driver puts
the data (if any) where they are needed and returns. The operating system then
returns control to the caller. This method is called busy waiting and has the
disadvantage of tying up the CPU polling the device until it is finished.
The second method is for the driver to start the device and ask it to give an
interrupt when it is finished. At that point, the driver returns. The operating 
system then blocks the caller if need be and looks for other work to do. When the 
controller detects the end of the transfer, it generates an interrupt to signal 
completion.
Interrupts are very important in operating systems, so let us examine the idea
more closely. In Fig. 1-11(a) we see a three-step process for I/O. In step 1, the
driver tells the controller what to do by writing into its device registers. The 
controller then starts the device. When the controller has finished reading or writing
