610
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
Simplicity also helps to minimize the attack surface (all the points
where an attacker may interact with the system to try to compromise
it). A system that offers a large set of functions to untrusted users,
each implemented by many lines of code, has a large attack surface. If
a function is not really needed, leave it out. Back in the old days,
when memory was expensive and scarce, programmers followed this
principle out of necessity. The PDP-1 minicomputer, on which one of
the authors cut his (programming) teeth, had 4K of 18-bit words or
about 9 KB of total internal memory. It ran a timesharing system that
could support three simultaneous users. Programs were necessarily
very simple. Nowadays you cannot even boot the computer with less
than a gigabyte of RAM and all this bloat makes programs buggy and
unreliable.
2. Principle of fail-safe defaults. Say you need to organize the access
to a resource. It is better to make explicit rules about how users can
access the resource than trying to identify the condition under which
access to the resource should be denied. Phrased differently: a default
of lack of permission is safer. This is how locked doors work: If you
don’t hav e the key, you cannot get in.
3. Principle of complete mediation. Every access to every resource
should be checked for authority. It implies that we must have a way to
determine the source of a request (the requester).
4. POLA (Principle of least authority). This principle states that any
(sub) system should have just enough authority (privilege) to perform
its task and no more. Thus, if attackers compromise such a system,
they elevate their privilege only by the bare minimum.
5. Principle of privilege separation. Closely related to the previous
point: it is better to split up the system in multiple POLA-compliant
components than a single component with all the privileges 
combined. Again, if one component is compromised, the attackers will be
limited in what they can do.
6. Principle of least common mechanism. This principle is a little
trickier and states that we should minimize the amount of mechanism
common to more than one user and depended on by all users. Think
of it this way: if we have a choice between implementing a file 
system routine in the operating system where its global variables are
shared by all users, or in a user space library which, to all intents and
purposes, is private to the user process, we should opt for the latter.
The shared data in the operating system may otherwise serve as an
information path between different users. We shall see examples of
such sidechannels later.
