18
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
families of Windows forked off their own variations in the form of service packs
in a dizzying proliferation of versions. It was enough to drive some administrators
(and writers of operating systems textbooks) balmy.
When in January 2007 Microsoft finally released the successor to Windows
XP, which it called Vista, it came with a new graphical interface, improved 
security, and many new or upgraded user programs. It bombed. Users complained about
high system requirements and restrictive licensing terms. Its successor, Windows
7, a much less resource hungry version of the operating system, quickly overtook
it. In 2012, Windows 8 came out. It had a completely new look and feel, geared
largely for touch screens. The company hoped that the new design would become
the dominant operating system on a wide variety of devices: desktops, notebooks,
tablets, phones, and home theater PCs. It did not. While Windows 8 (and 
especially Windows 8.1) were successful, their popularity was mostly limited to PCs. In
fact, many people did not like the new design much and Microsoft reverted it in
2015 in Windows 10. A few years later, Windows 10 overtook Windows 7 as the
most popular Windows version. Windows 11 was released in 2021.
The other major contender in the personal computer world comprises the
UNIX family. UNIX, and especially Linux, is strongest on network and enterprise
servers but also popular on desktop computers, notebooks, tablets, embedded 
systems, and smartphones. FreeBSD is also a popular UNIX derivative, originating
from the BSD project at Berkeley. Every modern Mac runs a modified version of
FreeBSD (macOS). UNIX derivatives are widely used on mobile devices, such as
those running iOS 7 or Android.
Many UNIX users, especially experienced programmers, prefer a 
command-based interface to a GUI, so nearly all UNIX systems support a windowing
system called the X Window System (also known as X11) produced at M.I.T.
This system handles the basic window management, allowing users to create,
delete, move, and resize windows using a mouse. Often a complete GUI-based
desktop environment, such as Gnome or KDE, is available to run on top of X11,
giving UNIX a look and feel something like the Macintosh or Microsoft Windows,
for those UNIX users who want such a thing.
An interesting development that began during the mid-1980s was the 
development of network operating systems and distributed operating systems to 
manage a collection of computers (Van Steen and Tanenbaum, 2017). In a network
operating system, the users are aware of the existence of multiple computers and
can log in to remote machines and copy files from one machine to another. Each
machine runs its own local operating system and has its own local user (or users).
Such systems are not fundamentally different from single-processor operating 
systems. They obviously need a network interface and some low-level software to
drive it, as well as programs to achieve remote login and remote file access, but
these additions do not change the essential structure of the operating system.
A distributed operating system, in contrast, is one that appears to its users as a
traditional uniprocessor system, even though it is actually composed of multiple
