SEC. 12.3
IMPLEMENTATION
1061
are all Unicode strings, looking up a file name in the registry will not work, just as
using an MFT index in the object table will not work. In a good design, 
considerable thought is given to how many namespaces are needed, what the syntax of
names is in each one, how they can be told apart, whether absolute and relative
names exist, and so on.
12.3.5 Binding Time
As we have just seen, operating systems use various kinds of names to refer to
objects. Sometimes the mapping between a name and an object is fixed, but 
sometimes it is not. In the latter case, when the name is bound to the object may matter.
In general, early binding is simple, but not flexible, whereas late binding is more
complicated but often more flexible.
To clarify the concept of binding time, let us look at some real-world 
examples. An example of early binding is the practice of some colleges to allow parents
to enroll a baby at birth and prepay the current tuition. When the student shows up
18 years later, the tuition is fully paid, no matter how high it may be at that
moment.
In manufacturing, ordering parts in advance and maintaining an inventory of
them is early binding. In contrast, just-in-time manufacturing requires suppliers to
be able to provide parts on the spot, with no advance notice required. This is late
binding.
Programming languages often support multiple binding times for variables.
Global variables are bound to a particular virtual address by the compiler. This
exemplifies early binding. Variables local to a procedure are assigned a virtual
address (on the stack) at the time the procedure is invoked. This is intermediate
binding. Variables stored on the heap (those allocated by malloc in C or new in
Java) are assigned virtual addresses only at the time they are actually used. Here
we have late binding.
Operating systems often use early binding for most data structures, but 
occasionally use late binding for flexibility. Memory allocation is a case in point. Early
multiprogramming systems on machines lacking address-relocation hardware had
to load a program at some memory address and relocate it to run there. If it was
ev er swapped out, it had to be brought back at the same memory address or it
would fail. In contrast, paged virtual memory is a form of late binding. The actual
physical address corresponding to a given virtual address is not known until the
page is touched and actually brought into memory.
Another example of late binding is window placement in a GUI. In contrast to
the early graphical systems, in which the programmer had to specify the absolute
screen coordinates for all images on the screen, in modern GUIs the software uses
coordinates relative to the window’s origin, but that is not determined until the
window is put on the screen, and it may even be changed later.
