SEC. 11.11
SECURITY IN WINDOWS
1025
stripped. Applications launched by the user are assigned the standard token, but
when elevation is necessary and is approved, the process switches to the actual
administrator token.
Of course, without becoming administrator it is possible for an attacker to
destroy what the user really cares about, namely his personal files. But UAC does
help foil existing types of attacks, and it is always easier to recover a compromised
system if the attacker was unable to modify any of the system data or files.
Another important security feature in Windows is support for protected 
processes. As we mentioned earlier, protected processes provide a stronger security
boundary from user-mode attacks, including from administrators. Normally, the
user (as represented by a token object) defines the privilege boundary in the 
system. When a process is created, the user has access to the process through any
number of kernel facilities for process creation, debugging, path names, thread
injection, and so on. Protected processes are shut off from user-mode access. 
Usermode callers cannot read or write its virtual memory, cannot inject code or threads
into its address space. The original use of this was to allow digital rights 
management software to better protect content. Later, protected processes were expanded
to more user-friendly purposes, like securing the system against attackers rather
than securing content against attacks by the system owner. While protected 
processes are able to thwart straightforward attacks, defending a process against 
administrator users is very difficult without hardware-based isolation. Administrators
can easily load drivers into kernel-mode and access any VTL0 process. As such,
protected processes should be viewed as a layer of defense, but not more.
As mentioned above, the lsass process handles user authentication and 
therefore needs to maintain various secrets associated with credentials like password
hashes and Kerberos tickets in its address space. As such, it runs as a protected
process to guard against user-mode attacks, but malicious kernel-mode code can
easily leak these secrets. Credential Guard is a VBS feature introduced in 
Windows 10 which protects these secrets in an IUM trustlet called LsaIso.exe. lsass
communicates with LsaIso to perform authentication such that credential secrets
are never exposed to VTL0 and even kernel-mode malware cannot steal them.
Microsoft’s efforts to improve the security of Windows have been accelerating
since early 2000s as more and more attacks have been launched against systems
around the world. Attackers range from casual hackers to paid professionals to
very sophisticated nation states with virtually unlimited resources engaging in
cyber warfare. Some of these attacks have been very successful, taking entire 
countries and major corporations offline, and incurring costs of billions of dollars.
11.11.4 Security Mitigations
It would be great for users if computer software (and hardware) did not have
any bugs, particularly bugs that are exploitable by hackers to take control of their
computer and steal their information, or use their computer for illegal purposes
