210
MEMORY MANAGEMENT 
CHAP. 3
Class 0: not referenced, not modified.
Class 1: not referenced, modified.
Class 2: referenced, not modified.
Class 3: referenced, modified.
Although class 1 pages seem to be impossible, they occur when a class 3 page has
its R bit cleared by a clock interrupt. Clock interrupts do not clear the M bit
because this information is needed to know whether the page has to be rewritten to
disk later. Clearing R but not M leads to a class 1 page. In other words, a class 1
page is one that was modified long ago and has not been touched since then.
The NRU (Not Recently Used) algorithm removes a page at random from the
lowest-numbered nonempty class. Implicit in this algorithm is the idea that it is
better to remove a modified page that has not been referenced in at least one clock
tick (typically about 20 msec) than a clean page that is in heavy use. The main
attraction of NRU is that it is easy to understand, moderately efficient to 
implement, and gives a performance that, while certainly not optimal, may be adequate.
3.4.3 The First-In, First-Out (FIFO) Page Replacement Algorithm
Another low-overhead paging algorithm is the FIFO (First-In, First-Out)
algorithm. To illustrate how this works, consider a supermarket that has enough
shelves to display exactly k different products. One day, some company introduces
a new convenience food—instant, freeze-dried, organic yogurt that can be 
reconstituted in a microwave oven. It is an immediate success, so our finite supermarket
has to get rid of one old product in order to stock it.
One possibility is to find the product that the supermarket has been stocking
the longest (i.e., something it began selling 120 years ago) and get rid of it on the
grounds that no one is interested any more. In effect, the supermarket maintains a
linked list of all the products it currently sells in the order they were introduced.
The new one goes on the back of the list; the one at the front of the list is dropped.
As a page replacement algorithm, the same idea is applicable. The operating
system maintains a list of all pages currently in memory, with the most recent 
arrival at the tail and the least recent arrival at the head. On a page fault, the page at
the head is removed and the new page added to the tail of the list. When applied to
stores, FIFO might remove mustache wax, but it might also remove flour, salt, or
butter. When applied to computers, the same problem arises: the oldest page may
still be useful. For this reason, FIFO in its pure form is rarely used.
3.4.4 The Second-Chance Page Replacement Algorithm
A simple modification to FIFO that avoids the problem of throwing out a 
heavily used page is to inspect the R bit of the oldest page. If it is 0, the page is both
old and unused, so it is replaced immediately. If the R bit is 1, the bit is cleared,
the page is put onto the end of the list of pages, and its load time is updated as
though it had just arrived in memory. Then the search continues.
