164
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
Priorities can also be assigned dynamically by the system to achieve certain
system goals. For example, some processes are highly I/O bound and spend most
of their time waiting for I/O to complete. Whenever such a process wants the CPU,
it should be given the CPU immediately, to let it start its next I/O request, which
can then proceed in parallel with another process actually computing. Making the
I/O-bound process wait a long time for the CPU will just mean having it around
occupying memory for an unnecessarily long time. A simple algorithm for giving
good service to I/O-bound processes is to set the priority to 1/ f , where f is the 
fraction of the last quantum that a process used. A process that used only 1 msec of its
50-msec quantum would get priority 50, while a process that ran 25 msec before
blocking would get priority 2, and a process that used the whole quantum would
get priority 1.
It is often convenient to group processes into priority classes and use priority
scheduling among the classes but round-robin scheduling within each class. Figure
2-44 shows a system with four priority classes. The scheduling algorithm is as 
follows: as long as there are runnable processes in priority class 4, just run each one
for one quantum, round-robin fashion, and never bother with lower-priority classes.
If priority class 4 is empty, then run the class 3 processes round robin. If classes 4
and 3 are both empty, then run class 2 round robin, and so on. If priorities are not
adjusted occasionally, lower-priority classes may all starve to death.
Priority 4!
Priority 3!
Priority 2!
Priority 1
Queue!
headers
Runnable processes
(Highest priority)
(Lowest priority)
Figure 2-44. A scheduling algorithm with four priority classes.
Multiple Queues
One of the earliest priority schedulers was in CTSS, the M.I.T. Compatible
TimeSharing System that ran on the IBM 7094 (Corbato´ et al., 1962). CTSS had
the problem that process switching was slow because the 7094 could hold only one
process in memory. Each switch meant swapping the current process to disk and
reading in a new one from disk. The CTSS designers quickly realized that it was
more efficient to give CPU-bound processes a large quantum once in a while, 
rather than giving them small quanta frequently (to reduce swapping). On the other
hand, giving all processes a large quantum would mean poor response time, as we
