766
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
fully installed, the same as any statically installed driver. Other modern UNIX 
systems now also support loadable modules.
It is worth noting that loadable modules are a security nightmare. Putting a
piece of foreign code that may or may not have been vetted carefully and which
might contain security holes and backdoors into the kernel can create huge security
problems. Loadable modules should only be fetched from a source known to be
completely trustworthy.
10.6 THE LINUX FILE SYSTEM
The most visible part of any operating system, including Linux, is the file 
system. In the following sections, we will examine the basic ideas behind the Linux
file system, the system calls, and how the file system is implemented. Some of
these ideas derive from MULTICS, and many of them have been copied by 
MSDOS, Windows, and other systems, but others are unique to UNIX-based systems.
The Linux design is especially interesting because it clearly illustrates the principle
of Small is Beautiful. With minimal mechanism and a very limited number of 
system calls, Linux nevertheless provides a powerful and elegant file system.
10.6.1 Fundamental Concepts
The initial Linux file system was the MINIX 1 file system. However, because
it limited file names to 14 characters (in order to be compatible with UNIX Version
7) and its maximum file size was 64 MB (which was overkill on the 10-MB hard
disks of its era), there was interest in better file systems almost from the beginning
of the Linux development, which began about 5 years after MINIX 1 was released.
The first improvement was the ext file system, which allowed file names of 255
characters and files of 2 GB, but it was slower than the MINIX 1 file system, so the
search continued for a while. Eventually, the ext2 file system was invented, with
long file names, long files, and better performance, and it has become the main file
system. However, Linux supports several dozen file systems using the Virtual File
System (VFS) layer (described in the next section). When Linux is linked, a
choice is offered of which file systems should be built into the kernel. Others can
be dynamically loaded as modules during execution, if need be.
A Linux file is a sequence of 0 or more bytes containing arbitrary information.
No distinction is made between ASCII files, binary files, or any other kinds of
files. The meaning of the bits in a file is entirely up to the file’s owner. The system
does not care. File names are limited to 255 characters, and all the ASCII 
characters except NUL are allowed in file names, so a file name consisting of three 
carriage returns is a legal file name (but not an especially convenient one).
By convention, many programs (for example, compilers) expect file names to
consist of a base name and an extension, separated by a dot (which counts as a
