SEC. 11.9
WINDOWS POWER MANAGEMENT
1001
on batteries, and energy-conservation concerns related to desktop computers being
left on all the time and the high cost of supplying power to the huge server farms
that exist today.
Newer power-management facilities include reducing the power consumption
of components when the system is not in use by switching individual devices to
standby states, or even powering them off completely using soft power switches.
Multiprocessors shut down individual CPUs when they are not needed, and even
the clock rates of the running CPUs can be adjusted downward to reduce power
consumption. When a processor is idle, its power consumption is also reduced
since it needs to do nothing except wait for an interrupt to occur.
On heterogeneous multiprocessor systems with multiple types of processors,
significant power savings can be achieved by scheduling appropriate work to more
efficient processors. The power manager closely collaborates with the kernel
thread scheduler to influence its quality-of-service scheduling policies. For 
example, if the system is low on battery, the power manager can configure power policy
such that all low-QoS threads exclusively get scheduled to efficiency cores.
Windows supports a special shut down mode called hibernation, which copies
all of physical memory to disk and then shuts down the machine, reducing power
consumption to zero. Because all the memory state is written to disk, you can even
replace the battery on a notebook while it is hibernated. When the system resumes
after hibernation, it restores the saved memory state (and reinitializes the I/O 
devices). This brings the computer back into the same state it was before hibernation,
without having to login again and start up all the applications and services that
were running. Windows optimizes this process by ignoring unmodified pages
backed by disk already and compressing other memory pages to reduce the amount
of I/O bandwidth required. The hibernation algorithm automatically tunes itself to
balance between I/O and processor throughput. If there is more processor 
available, it uses expensive but more effective compression to reduce the I/O bandwidth
needed. When I/O bandwidth is sufficient, hibernation will skip the compression
altogether. With the current generation of multiprocessors, both hibernation and
resume can be performed in a few seconds even on systems with many gigabytes
of RAM.
An alternative to hibernation is standby mode where the power manager
reduces the entire system to the lowest power state possible, using just enough
power to the refresh the dynamic RAM. Because memory does not need to be 
copied to disk, this is somewhat faster than hibernation on some systems.
Despite the availability of hibernation and standby, many users are still in the
habit of shutting down their PC when they finish working. Windows uses 
hibernation to perform a pseudo shutdown and startup, called HiberBoot, that is much
faster than normal shutdown and startup. When the user tells the system to 
shutdown, HiberBoot logs the user off and then hibernates the system at the point they
would normally login again. Later, when the user turns the system on again, 
HiberBoot will resume the system at the login point. To the user it looks like startup was
