538
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
32 KB of L1 instruction cache and 32 KB of data cache in addition to 512 KB of
L2 cache. Finally, the cores share 256 MB of on-board L3 cache.
While the CPUs may or may not share caches (see Fig. 1-8), they always share
main memory, and this memory is consistent in the sense that there is always a
unique value for each memory word. Special hardware circuitry makes sure that if
a word is present in two or more caches and one of the CPUs modifies the word, it
is automatically and atomically removed from all the caches in order to maintain
consistency. This process is known as snooping.
The result of this design is that multicore chips are just very small 
multiprocessors. In fact, multicore chips are sometimes called CMPs (Chip 
MultiProcessors). From a software perspective, CMPs are not really that different from 
busbased multiprocessors or multiprocessors that use switching networks. However,
there are some differences. To start with, on a bus-based multiprocessor, each of
the CPUs has its own cache, as in Fig. 8-2(b) and also as in the design of
Fig. 1-8(b). The shared-cache design of Fig. 1-8(a) does not occur in other 
multiprocessors. Nowadays the L3 cache is typically shared. This does not necessarily
mean that they are centralized. Often a large, shared cache is partitioned in 
percore slices. For instance, on a CPU with 8 cores and a 32 MB shared cache, each
core has a slice of 4 MB. The slices are shared so that any core can access any
slice, but the performance varies. Accessing your local slice is much faster. In
other words, we have a NUMA cache.
NUMA issues aside, a shared L2 or L3 cache can affect performance either
positively or negatively. If one core needs a lot of cache memory and the others do
not, this design allows the cache hog to take whatever it needs. On the other hand,
the shared cache also makes it possible for a greedy core to hurt the other cores.
An area in which CMPs differ from their larger cousins is fault tolerance.
Because the CPUs are closely connected, failures in shared components may bring
down multiple CPUs at once, something unlikely in traditional multiprocessors.
In addition to symmetric multicore chips, where all the cores are identical,
another common category of multicore chip is the SoC (System On a Chip).
These chips have one or more main CPUs, but also special-purpose cores, such as
video and audio decoders, cryptoprocessors, network interfaces, and more, leading
to a complete computer system on a chip. The M1 chip, used on some Apple 
computers and mobile devices, is an SoC with four high-performance, power-hungry
cores and four lower-performance, energy-efficient cores. This gives the operating
system the ability to run threads on fast cores when that is needed but save energy
when it is not.
Manycore Chips
Multicore simply means ‘‘more than one core,’’ but when the number of cores
grows well beyond the reach of finger counting, we use another name. Manycore
chips are multicores that contain many tens, hundreds, or even thousands of cores.
