SEC. 6.9
SUMMARY
471
Livelock is similar to deadlock in that it can stop all forward progress, but it is
technically different since it involves processes that are not actually blocked. 
Starvation can be avoided by a first-come, first-served allocation policy.
PROBLEMS
1. Give an example of a deadlock taken from politics.
2. In the dining philosophers problem, let the following protocol be used: An 
even-numbered philosopher always picks up his left fork before picking up his right fork; an
odd-numbered philosopher always picks up his right fork before picking up his left
fork. Will this protocol guarantee deadlock-free operation?
3. In the solution to the dining philosophers problem (Fig. 6-5), why is the state variable
set to HUNGRY in the procedure take forks?
4. Consider the procedure put forks in Fig. 6-5. Suppose that the variable state[i] was
set to THINKING after the two calls to test, rather than before. How would this change
affect the solution?
5. Students working at individual PCs in a computer laboratory send their files to be
printed by a server that spools the files on its hard disk. Under what conditions may a
deadlock occur if the disk space for the print spool is limited? How may the deadlock
be avoided?
6. In the preceding question, which resources are preemptable and which are 
nonpreemptable?
7. In Fig. 6-1, the resources are returned in the reverse order of their acquisition. Would
giving them back in the other order be just as good?
8. The four conditions (mutual exclusion, hold and wait, no preemption and circular wait)
are necessary for a resource deadlock to occur. Giv e an example to show that these
conditions are not sufficient for a resource deadlock to occur. When are these 
conditions sufficient for a resource deadlock to occur?
9. City streets are vulnerable to a circular blocking condition called gridlock, in which
intersections are blocked by cars that then block cars behind them that then block the
cars that are trying to enter the previous intersection, etc. All intersections around a
city block are filled with vehicles that block the oncoming traffic in a circular manner.
Gridlock is a resource deadlock and a problem in competition synchronization. New
York City’s prevention algorithm, called ‘‘don’t block the box,’’ prohibits cars from
entering an intersection unless the space following the intersection is also available.
Which prevention algorithm is this? Can you provide any other prevention algorithms
for gridlock?
10. Suppose four cars each approach an intersection from four different directions 
simultaneously. Each corner of the intersection has a stop sign. Assume that traffic 
regulations require that when two cars approach adjacent stop signs at the same time, the car
