SEC. 1.3
COMPUTER HARDWARE REVIEW
27
On multicore chips, the designers have to decide where to place the caches. In
Fig. 1-8(a), a single L2 cache is shared by all the cores. In contrast, in Fig. 1-8(b),
each core has its own L2 cache. Each strategy has its pros and cons. For example,
the shared L2 cache requires a more complicated cache controller but the per-core
L2 caches makes keeping the caches consistent more difficult.
Main memory comes next in the hierarchy of Fig. 1-9. This is the workhorse
of the memory system. Main memory is usually called RAM (Random Access
Memory). Old-timers sometimes call it core memory, because computers in the
1950s and 1960s used tiny magnetizable ferrite cores for main memory. They hav e
been gone for decades but the name persists. Currently, memories are often tens of
gigabytes on desktop or server machines. All CPU requests that cannot be 
satisfied out of the cache go to main memory.
In addition to the main memory, many computers have different kinds of 
nonvolatile random-access memory. Unlike RAM, nonvolatile memory does not lose
its contents when the power is switched off. ROM (Read Only Memory) is 
programmed at the factory and cannot be changed afterward. It is fast and 
inexpensive. On some computers, the bootstrap loader used to start the computer is 
contained in ROM. EEPROM (Electrically Erasable PROM) is also nonvolatile,
but in contrast to ROM can be erased and rewritten. However, writing it takes
orders of magnitude more time than writing RAM, so it is used in the same way
ROM is, except that it is now possible to correct bugs in programs by rewriting
them in the field. Boot strapping code may also be stored in Flash memory,
which is similarly nonvolatile, but in contrast to ROM can be erased and rewritten.
The boot strapping code is commonly referred to as BIOS (Basic Input/Output
System). Flash memory is also commonly used as the storage medium in portable
electronic devices such as smartphones and in SSDs to serve as a faster alternative
to hard disks. Flash memory is intermediate in speed between RAM and disk.
Also, unlike disk memory, if it is erased too many times, it wears out. Firmware
inside the device tries to mitigate this through load balancing.
Yet another kind of memory is CMOS, which is volatile. Many computers use
CMOS memory to hold the current time and date. The CMOS memory and the
clock circuit that increments the time in it are powered by a small battery, so the
time is correctly updated, even when the computer is unplugged. The CMOS 
memory can also hold the configuration parameters, such as which drive to boot from.
CMOS is used because it draws so little power that the original factory-installed
battery often lasts for several years. However, when it begins to fail, the computer
can appear to be losing its marbles, forgetting things that it has known for years,
like how to boot.
Incidentally, many computers today support a scheme known as virtual 
memory, which we will discuss at some length in Chap. 3. It makes it possible to run
programs larger than physical memory by placing them on nonvolatile storage
(SSD or disk) and using main memory as a kind of cache for the most heavily
executed parts. From time to time, the program will need data that are currently not
