558
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
To get around these problems, much research has been done on 
multicomputers, which are tightly coupled CPUs that do not share memory. Each one has its
own memory, as shown in Fig. 8-1(b). These systems are also known by a variety
of other names, including cluster computers and COWs (Clusters Of 
Workstations). Cloud computing services are always built on multicomputers because they
need to be large.
Multicomputers are easy to build because the basic component is just a
stripped-down PC, without a keyboard, mouse, or monitor, but with a 
high-performance network interface card. Of course, the secret to getting high performance
is to design the interconnection network and the interface card cleverly. This 
problem is completely analogous to building the shared memory in a multiprocessor
[e.g., see Fig. 8-1(b)]. However, the goal is to send messages on a microsecond
time scale, rather than access memory on a nanosecond time scale, so it is simpler,
cheaper, and easier to accomplish.
In the following sections, we will first take a brief look at multicomputer 
hardware, especially the interconnection hardware. Then we will move onto the 
software, starting with low-level communication software, then high-level 
communication software. We will also look at a way shared memory can be achieved on 
systems that do not have it. Finally, we will examine scheduling and load balancing.
8.2.1 Multicomputer Hardware
The basic node of a multicomputer consists of a CPU, memory, a network
interface, and sometimes a hard disk. The node may be packaged in a standard PC
case, but the monitor, keyboard, and mouse are nearly always absent. Sometimes
this configuration is called a headless workstation because there is no user with a
head in front of it. A workstation with a human user should logically be called a
‘‘headed workstation,’’ but for some reason it is not. In some cases, the PC 
contains a two-way or four-way multiprocessor board, possibly each with a dual-,
quad- or octa-core chip, instead of a single CPU, but for simplicity, we will assume
that each node has one CPU. Often hundreds or even thousands of nodes are
hooked together to form a multicomputer. Below we will say a little about how this
hardware is organized.
Interconnection Technology
Each node has a network interface card with one or two cables (or fibers) 
coming out of it. These cables connect either to other nodes or to switches. In a small
system, there may be one switch to which all the nodes are connected in the star
topology of Fig. 8-16(a). Modern switched Ethernets use this topology within an
office or a small building.
As an alternative to the single-switch design, the nodes may form a ring, with
two wires coming out the network interface card, one into the node on the left and
