564
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
suitable process. As it is faster to process all segments in the same TCP flow on the
same processor (where the caches are warm), the card can use the hashing logic to
hash the TCP flow fields (IP addresses and TCP port numbers) and add all 
segments with the same hash on the same queue that is served by a specific core. This
is also useful for virtualization, as it allows us to give each virtual machine its own
queue.
Node-to-Network Interface Communication
Another issue is how to get packets onto the interface board. The fastest way is
to use the DMA chip on the board to just copy them in from RAM. The problem
with this approach is that DMA may use physical rather than virtual addresses and
runs independently of the CPU, unless an I/O MMU is present. To start with,
although a user process certainly knows the virtual address of any packet it wants
to send, it generally does not know the physical address. Making a system call to
do the virtual-to-physical mapping is undesirable, since the point of putting the
interface board in user space in the first place was to avoid having to make a 
system call for each packet to be sent.
In addition, if the operating system decides to replace a page while the DMA
chip is copying a packet from it, the wrong data will be transmitted. Worse yet, if
the operating system replaces a page while the DMA chip is copying an incoming
packet to it, not only will the incoming packet be lost, but also a page of innocent
memory will be ruined, probably with disastrous consequences shortly.
These problems can be avoided by having system calls to pin and unpin pages
in memory, marking them as temporarily unpageable. However, having to make a
system call to pin the page containing each outgoing packet and then having to
make another call later to unpin it is expensive. If packets are small, say, 64 bytes
or less, the overhead for pinning and unpinning every buffer is prohibitive. For
large packets, say, 1 KB or more, it may be tolerable. For sizes in between, it
depends on the details of the hardware. Besides introducing a performance hit,
pinning and unpinning pages add to the software complexity. And if user 
processes can pin pages, what is to prevent a greedy process from pinning all its page to
keep them from being paged out in order to improve its performance?
Remote Direct Memory Access
In some fields, high network latencies are simply not acceptable. For instance,
for certain applications in high-performance computing the computation time is
strongly dependent on the network latency. Likewise, high-frequency trading is all
about having computers perform transactions (buying and selling stock) at
extremely high speeds—every microsecond counts. Whether or not it is wise to
have computer programs trade millions of dollars worth of stock in a millisecond,
when pretty much all software tends to be buggy, is an interesting question for
