614
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
there is nothing they can do to compromise system security. By reducing the 
trusted computing base by two orders of magnitude, systems like MINIX 3 can 
potentially offer much higher security than conventional designs.
Unikernels may reduce the TCB in a different way, by aggressively removing
ev erything that is not essential for the application in the Unikernel. While there
may be little or no separation between the operating system and the kernel, the
total amount of code in the TCB is much reduced compared to monolithic systems.
The point is that the structure of the operating system has important consequences
for the security guarantees.
9.1.5 Attackers
Systems are under constant threat from attackers who try to violate the security
guarantees provided by the operating system or hypervisor, by stealing confidential
data, modifying data to which they should not have access, or crashing the system.
There are many ways in which an outsider can attack a system; we will look at
some of them later in this chapter. Many of the attacks nowadays are supported by
highly advanced tools and services. Some of these tools are built by criminals, 
others by ‘‘ethical hackers,’’ who are trying to help companies find flaws in their 
software so they can be repaired before it is released.
Incidentally, the popular press tends to use the generic term ‘‘hacker’’ for the
criminals. However, within the computer world, ‘‘hacker’’ is a term of honor
reserved for all great programmers. While some of these are rogues, most are not.
The press got this one wrong. In deference to true hackers, we will use the term in
the original sense and will call people who try to break into computer systems
where they do not belong either crackers.
Hackers and crackers have influenced operating system design in more ways
than one. Not only have operating systems adopted a wide variety of protection
mechanisms to prevent attackers from compromising the system, the crackers
scene also served as a source of inspiration for the earlier computer pioneers. Steve
Wozniak and Steve Jobs spent their time developing tools for phone phreaking
(cracking the telephony system) before moving on to build a personal computer
that they decided to call Apple. According to Wozniak, there would have been no
Apple without John Draper, a controversial cracker popularly known as Captain
Crunch. He acquired his nickname when he discovered that the toy whistle in a
package of Cap’n Crunch cereals emitted a tone of 2600 Hz, which happened to be
the exact frequency used by AT&T to authorize its (then expensive) long distance
calls. Before founding one of the most successful computer companies in history,
the two Steves similarly spent their time trying to get phone calls for free.
In the security literature, people who are nosing around places where they hav e
no business being may also be called attackers, intruders, or sometimes 
adversaries. A few decades ago, cracking computer systems was all about showing your
