SEC. 10.2
OVERVIEW OF LINUX
721
Program 
Typical use
cat 
Concatenate multiple files to standard output
chmod 
Change file protection mode
cp 
Copy one or more files
cut 
Cut columns of text from a file
grep 
Search a file for some pattern
head 
Extract the first lines of a file
ls 
List director y
make
Compile files to build a binary
mkdir 
Make a director y
od 
Octal dump a file
paste 
Paste columns of text into a file
pr 
For mat a file for printing
ps 
List running processes
rm 
Remove one or more files
rmdir 
Remove a director y
sor t
Sor t a file of lines alphabetically
tail 
Extract the last lines of a file
tr 
Translate between character sets
Figure 10-2. A few of the common Linux utility programs required by POSIX.
Next, we divide the various kernel subsystems into three main components.
The I/O component in Fig. 10-3 contains all kernel pieces responsible for 
interacting with devices and performing network and storage I/O operations. At the 
highest level, the I/O operations are all integrated under a VFS (Virtual File System)
layer. That is, at the top level, performing a read operation on a file, whether it is in
memory or on disk, is the same as performing a read operation to retrieve a 
character from a terminal input. At the lowest level, all I/O operations pass through some
device driver. All Linux drivers are classified as either character-device drivers or
block-device drivers, the main difference being that seeks and random accesses are
allowed on block devices and not on character devices. Technically, network 
devices are really character devices, but they are handled somewhat differently, so
that it is probably clearer to separate them, as has been done in the figure.
Above the device-driver lev el, the kernel code is different for each device type.
Character devices may be used in two different ways. Some programs, such as
visual editors like vi and emacs, want every keystroke as it is hit. Raw terminal
(tty) I/O makes this possible. Other software, such as the shell, is line oriented,
allowing users to edit the whole line before hitting ENTER to send it to the 
program. In this case, the character stream from the terminal device is passed through
a so-called line discipline, and appropriate formatting is applied.
