SEC. 11.4
PROCESSES AND THREADS IN WINDOWS
941
11.4.3 Implementation of Processes and Threads
In this section, we will get into more detail about how Windows creates a 
process (and the initial thread). Because Win32 is the most documented interface, we
will start there. But we will quickly work our way down into the kernel and 
understand the implementation of the native API call for creating a new process. We
will focus on the main code paths that get executed whenever processes are 
created, as well as look at a few of the details that fill in gaps in what we have covered
so far.
A process is created when another process makes the Win32 CreateProcess
call. This call invokes a user-mode procedure in kernelbase.dll that makes a call to
NtCreateUserProcess in the kernel to create the process in several steps.
1. Convert the executable file name given as a parameter from a Win32
path name to an NT path name. If the executable has just a name
without a directory path name, it is searched for in the directories 
listed in the default directories (which include, but are not limited to,
those in the PATH variable in the environment).
2. Bundle up the process-creation parameters and pass them, along with
the full path name of the executable program, to the native API
NtCreateUserProcess.
3. Running in kernel mode, NtCreateUserProcess processes the 
parameters, then opens the program image and creates a section object that
can be used to map the program into the new process’ virtual address
space.
4. The process manager allocates and initializes the process object (the
kernel data structure representing a process to both the kernel and
executive layers).
5. The memory manager creates the address space for the new process
by allocating and initializing the page directories and the virtual
address descriptors which describe the kernel-mode portion, including
the process-specific regions, such as the self-map page-directory
entries that gives each process kernel-mode access to the physical
pages in its entire page table using kernel virtual addresses. (We will
describe the self map in more detail in Sec. 11.5.)
6. A handle table is created for the new process, and all the handles from
the caller that are allowed to be inherited are duplicated into it.
7. The shared user page is mapped, and the memory manager initializes
the working-set data structures used for deciding what pages to trim
from a process when physical memory is low. The executable image
