340
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
assembled, bit by bit, in a buffer inside the controller. After its checksum has been
verified and the block has been declared to be error free, it can then be copied to
main memory.
The controller for an LCD display monitor also works as a bit serial device at
an equally low lev el. It reads bytes containing the characters to be displayed from
memory and generates the signals to modify the polarization of the backlight for
the corresponding pixels in order to write them on screen. If it were not for the
display controller, the operating system programmer would have to explicitly 
program the electric fields of all pixels. With the controller, the operating system 
initializes the controller with a few parameters, such as the number of characters or
pixels per line and number of lines per screen, and lets the controller take care of
actually driving the electric fields.
In a very short time, LCD screens have completely replaced the old CRT
(Cathode Ray Tube) monitors. CRT monitors fire a beam of electrons onto a 
fluorescent screen. Using magnetic fields, the system is able to bend the beam and
draw pixels on the screen. Compared to LCD screens, CRT monitors were bulky,
power hungry, and fragile. Moreover, the resolution on today’s (Retina) LCD
screens is so good that the human eye is unable to distinguish individual pixels. It
is hard to imagine today that laptops in the past came with a small CRT screen that
made them more than 20 cm deep with a nice work-out weight of around 12 kg.
5.1.3 Memory-Mapped I/O
Each controller has a few registers that are used for communicating with the
CPU. By writing into these registers, the operating system can command the 
device to deliver data, accept data, switch itself on or off, or otherwise perform some
action. By reading from these registers, the operating system can learn what the
device’s state is, whether it is prepared to accept a new command, and so on.
In addition to the control registers, many devices have a data buffer that the
operating system can read and write. For example, a common way for computers to
display pixels on the screen is to have a video RAM, which is basically just a data
buffer, available for programs or the operating system to write into.
The issue thus arises of how the CPU communicates with the control registers
and also with the device data buffers. Two alternatives exist. In the first approach,
each control register is assigned an I/O port number, an 8- or 16-bit integer. The
set of all the I/O ports form the I/O port space, which is protected so that ordinary
user programs cannot access it (only the operating system can). Using a special
I/O instruction such as
IN REG,PORT,
the CPU can read in control register PORT and store the result in CPU register
REG. Similarly, using
OUT PORT,REG
