Product Management: K. K. Neelakantan 
Supplements: Nitin Shankar 
Production and Digital Studio: Vikram Medepalli, 
Naina Singh, and Niharika Thapa 
Rights and Permissions: Anjali Singh and Ashish Vyas 
 
Cover image: tk 
Please contact https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/ with any queries on this content. 
Pearson Education Limited 
KAO Two 
KAO Park 
Hockham Way 
Harlow 
CM17 9SR 
United Kingdom 
 
and Associated Companies throughout the world 
 
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsonglobaleditions.com 
 
© Pearson Education Limited 2024 
 
The rights of Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Herbert Bos to be identified as the authors of this work have been asserted by them 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 
Authorized adaptation from the United States edition, entitled Modern Operating Systems, 5th Edition, ISBN 
978-0-13761887-3 by Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Herbert Bos published by Pearson Education © 2023. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of the 
publisher or a license permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. For information regarding permissions, request forms and the 
appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights & Permissions department, please visit 
www.pearsoned.com/permissions/. 
 
Acknowledgments of third-party content appear on the appropriate page within the text. 
 
PEARSON and ALWAYS LEARNING are exclusive trademarks owned by Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates in the U.S. 
and/or other countries. 
 
Unless otherwise indicated herein, any third-party trademarks that may appear in this work are the property of their respective 
owners and any references to third-party trademarks, logos or other trade dress are for demonstrative or descriptive purposes 
only. Such references are not intended to imply any sponsorship, endorsement, authorization, or promotion of Pearson’s 
products by the owners of such marks, or any relationship between the owner and Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates, 
authors, licensees, or distributors. 
 
This eBook is a standalone product and may or may not include all assets that were part of the print version. It also does not 
provide access to other Pearson digital products like MyLab and Mastering. The publisher reserves the right to remove any 
material in this eBook at any time. 
 
ISBN 10: 1-292-45966-2 
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-45966-0 
eBook ISBN 13: 978-1-292-72789-9 
 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 
