SEC. 1.2
HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
15
code was widely available, various organizations developed their own 
(incompatible) versions, which led to chaos. Two major versions developed, System V, from
AT&T, and BSD (Berkeley Software Distribution) from the University of 
California at Berkeley. These had minor variants as well. To make it possible to write
programs that could run on any UNIX system, IEEE developed a standard for
UNIX, called POSIX, that most versions of UNIX now support. POSIX defines a
minimal system-call interface that conformant UNIX systems must support. In
fact, some other operating systems now also support the POSIX interface.
As an aside, it is worth mentioning that in 1987, one of the authors 
(Tanenbaum) released a small clone of UNIX, called MINIX, primarily for educational
purposes. Functionally, MINIX is very similar to UNIX, including POSIX support.
Since that time, the original version of MINIX has evolved into MINIX 3, which is
highly modular and focused on very high reliability and available for free from the
Website www.minix3.org. MINIX 3 has the ability to detect and replace faulty or
ev en crashed modules (such as I/O device drivers) on the fly without a reboot and
without disturbing running programs. A book describing its internal operation and
listing the source code in an appendix is also available (Tanenbaum and Woodhull,
2006).
The desire for a free production (as opposed to educational) version of MINIX
led a Finnish student, Linus Torvalds, to write Linux. This system was directly
inspired by and developed on MINIX and originally supported various MINIX 
features (e.g., the MINIX file system). It has since been extended in many ways by
many people but still retains some underlying structure common to MINIX and to
UNIX. Readers interested in a detailed history of Linux and the open source
movement might want to read Glyn Moody’s (2001) book. Most of what will be
said about UNIX in this book thus applies to System V, MINIX, Linux, and other
versions and clones of UNIX as well.
Interestingly, both Linux and MINIX have become widely used. Linux powers
a huge share of the servers in data centers and forms the basis of Android which
dominates the smartphone market. MINIX was adapted by Intel for a separate and
somewhat secret ‘‘management’’ processor embedded in virtually all its chipsets
since 2008. In other words, if you have an Intel CPU, you also run MINIX deep in
your processor, even if your main operating system is, say, Windows or Linux.
1.2.4 The Fourth Generation (1980–Present): Personal Computers
With the development of LSI (Large Scale Integration) circuits—chips 
containing thousands of transistors on a square centimeter of silicon—the age of the
personal computer dawned. In terms of architecture, personal computers (initially
called microcomputers) were not all that different from minicomputers of the
PDP-11 class, but in terms of price they certainly were different. Where the 
minicomputer made it possible for a department in a company or university to have its
