566
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
The former sends the message pointed to by mptr to a process identified by dest
and causes the called to be blocked until the message has been sent. The latter
causes the called to be blocked until a message arrives. When one does, the 
message is copied to the buffer pointed to by mptr and the called is unblocked. The
addr parameter specifies the address to which the receiver is listening. Many 
variants of these two procedures and their parameters are possible.
One issue is how addressing is done. Since multicomputers are static, with the
number of CPUs fixed, the easiest way to handle addressing is to make addr a 
twopart address consisting of a CPU number and a process or port number on the
addressed CPU. In this way, each CPU can manage its own addresses without
potential conflicts.
Blocking Versus Nonblocking Calls
The calls described above are blocking calls (sometimes called synchronous
calls). When a process calls send, it specifies a destination and a buffer to send to
that destination. While the message is being sent, the sending process is blocked
(i.e., suspended). The instruction following the call to send is not executed until
the message has been completely sent, as shown in Fig. 8-19(a). Similarly, a call
to receive does not return control until a message has actually been received and
put in the message buffer pointed to by the parameter. The process remains 
suspended in receive until a message arrives, even if it takes hours. In some systems,
the receiver can specify from whom it wishes to receive, in which case it remains
blocked until a message from that sender arrives.
An alternative to blocking calls is the use of nonblocking calls (sometimes
called asynchronous calls). If send is nonblocking, it returns control to the called
immediately, before the message is sent. The advantage of this scheme is that the
sending process can continue computing in parallel with the message transmission,
instead of having the CPU go idle (assuming no other process is runnable). The
choice between blocking and nonblocking primitives is normally made by the 
system designers (i.e., either one primitive is available or the other), although in a few
systems both are available and users can choose their favorite.
However, the performance advantage offered by nonblocking primitives is 
offset by a serious disadvantage for the programmer: the sender must not modify the
message buffer until the message has been sent. The consequences of the process
overwriting the message during transmission are too horrible to contemplate.
Worse yet, the sending process has no idea of when the transmission is done, so the
programmer never knows when it is safe to reuse the buffer. It can hardly avoid
touching it forever.
There are three possible ways out. The first solution is to have the kernel copy
the message to an internal kernel buffer and then allow the process to continue, as
shown in Fig. 8-19(b). From the sender’s point of view, this scheme is the same as
