354
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
5.2.2 Programmed I/O
There are three fundamentally different ways that I/O can be performed. In
this section we will look at the first one (programmed I/O). In the next two 
sections we will examine the others (interrupt-driven I/O and I/O using DMA). The
simplest form of I/O is to have the CPU do all the work. This method is called 
programmed I/O.
It is simplest to illustrate how programmed I/O works by means of an example.
Consider a user process that wants to print the eight-character string 
‘‘ABCDEFGH’’ on the printer via a serial interface. Displays on small embedded systems
sometimes work this way. The software first assembles the string in a buffer in
user space, as shown in Fig. 5-7(a).
String to!
be printed
User!
space
Kernel!
space
ABCD!
EFGH
Printed!
page
(a)
ABCD!
EFGH
ABCD!
EFGH
Printed!
page
(b)
A
Next
(c)
AB
Next
Figure 5-7. Steps in printing a string.
The user process then acquires the printer for writing by making a system call
to open it. If the printer is currently in use by another process, this call will fail
and return an error code or will block until the printer is available, depending on
the operating system and the parameters of the call. Once it has the printer, the user
process makes a system call telling the operating system to print the string.
The operating system then (usually) copies the buffer with the string to an
array, in kernel space, where it is more easily accessed (because the kernel may
have to change the memory map to get at user space) and also safe from 
modification by the user process. It then checks to see if the printer is currently available.
If not, it waits until it is. As soon as the printer is available, the operating system
copies the first character to the printer’s data register, in this example using 
memory-mapped I/O. This action activates the printer. The character may not appear yet
because some printers buffer a line or a page before printing anything. In
Fig. 5-7(b), however, we see that the first character has been printed and that the
system has marked the ‘‘B’’ as the next character to be printed.
