370
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
When the SSD or disk is finished, the hardware generates an interrupt. The
interrupt handler is run to discover what has happened, that is, which device wants
attention right now. It then extracts the status from the device and wakes up the
sleeping process to finish off the I/O request and let the user process continue.
5.4 MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
Now we will begin studying some real I/O devices. We will begin with storage
devices. In later sections, we examine clocks, keyboards, and displays. Modern
storage devices come in a variety of types. The most common ones are magnetic
hard disks and SSDs. For distribution of programs, data, and movies, old fogeys
may still use optical disks (DVDs and Blu-ray), but these are rapidly going out of
fashion and will not be discussed in this (undeniably fashionable) book. Instead,
we briefly discuss magnetic disks and SSDs. We will start with the former, as it is a
nice case study.
5.4.1 Magnetic Disks
Magnetic disks are characterized by the fact that reads and writes are equally
fast, which makes them suitable as secondary memory (paging, file systems, etc.).
Arrays of these disks are sometimes used to provide highly reliable storage. They
are organized into cylinders, each one containing as many tracks as there are heads
stacked vertically. The tracks are divided into sectors, with typically up to several
hundreds of sectors around the circumference. The number of heads varies from 1
to about 16.
Older disks had little electronics and just delivered a simple serial bit stream.
On these disks, the controller did most of the work. On other disks, in particular,
SATA (Serial ATA) disks, the drive itself contains a microcontroller that does 
considerable work and allows the real disk controller to issue a set of higher-level
commands. The controller does track caching, bad-block remapping, and more.
A device feature that has important implications for the disk driver is the 
possibility of a controller doing seeks on two or more drives at the same time. These are
known as overlapped seeks. While the controller and software are waiting for a
seek to complete on one drive, the controller can initiate a seek on another drive.
Many controllers can also read or write on one drive while seeking on one or more
other drives. Moreover, a system with several hard disks with integrated controllers
can operate them simultaneously, at least to the extent of transferring between the
disk and the controller’s buffer memory. Howev er, only one transfer between the
controller and the main memory is possible at once. The ability to perform two or
more operations at the same time can reduce the average access time considerably.
If we compare the standard storage medium of the original IBM PC (a floppy
disk) with a modern hard disk, such as the Seagate IronWolf Pro, we see that many
