SEC. 1.2
HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
11
numerical calculations in science and engineering. On the other hand, there were
the character-oriented, commercial computers, such as the 1401, which were 
widely used for tape sorting and printing by banks and insurance companies.
Developing and maintaining two completely different product lines was an
expensive proposition for the manufacturers. In addition, many new computer 
customers initially needed a small machine but later outgrew it and wanted a bigger
machine that would run all their old programs, but faster.
IBM attempted to solve both of these problems at a single stroke by 
introducing the System/360. The 360 was a series of software-compatible machines 
ranging from 1401-sized models to much larger ones, more powerful than the mighty
7094. The machines differed only in price and performance (maximum memory,
processor speed, number of I/O devices permitted, and so forth). Since they all had
the same architecture and instruction set, programs written for one machine could
run on all the others—at least in theory. (But as Yogi Berra reputedly said: ‘‘In
theory, theory and practice are the same; in practice, they are not.’’) Since the 360
was designed to handle both scientific (i.e., numerical) and commercial computing,
a single family of machines could satisfy the needs of all customers. In subsequent
years, IBM came out with backward compatible successors to the 360 line, using
more modern technology, known as the 370, 4300, 3080, and 3090. The zSeries is
the most recent descendant of this line, although it has diverged considerably from
the original.
The IBM 360 was the first major computer line to use (small-scale) ICs 
(Integrated Circuits), thus providing a major price/performance advantage over the
second-generation machines, which were built up from individual transistors. It
was an immediate and massive success, and the idea of a family of compatible
computers was soon adopted by all the other major manufacturers. The 
descendants of these machines are still in use at computer centers today. Now adays they
are often used for managing huge databases (e.g., for airline reservation systems)
or as servers for World Wide Web sites that must process thousands of requests per
second.
The greatest strength of the ‘‘single-family’’ idea was simultaneously its 
greatest weakness. The original intention was that all software, including the operating
system, OS/360, had to work on all models. It had to run on small systems, which
often just replaced 1401s for copying cards to tape, and on very large systems,
which often replaced 7094s for doing weather forecasting and other heavy 
computing. It had to be good on systems with few peripherals and on systems with many
peripherals. It had to work in commercial environments and in scientific 
environments. Above all, it had to be efficient for all of these different uses.
There was no way that IBM (or anybody else for that matter) could write a
piece of software to meet all those conflicting requirements. The result was an
enormous and extraordinarily complex operating system, probably two to three
orders of magnitude larger than FMS. It consisted of millions of lines of assembly
language written by thousands of programmers, and contained thousands upon
