546
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
we discussed earlier, what this instruction does is read out a memory word and
store it in a register. Simultaneously, it writes a 1 (or some other nonzero value)
into the memory word. Of course, it takes two bus cycles to perform the memory
read and memory write. On a uniprocessor, as long as the instruction cannot be
broken off halfway, TSL always works as expected.
Now think about what could happen on a multiprocessor. In Fig. 8-10, we see
the worst-case timing, in which memory word 1000, being used as a lock, is 
initially 0. In step 1, CPU 1 reads out the word and gets a 0. In step 2, before CPU 1
has a chance to rewrite the word to 1, CPU 2 gets in and also reads the word out as
a 0. In step 3, CPU 1 writes a 1 into the word. In step 4, CPU 2 also writes a 1
into the word. Both CPUs got a 0 back from the TSL instruction, so both of them
now hav e access to the critical region and the mutual exclusion fails.
CPU 1
Memory
CPU 2
Bus
Word!
1000 is!
initially 0
1. CPU 1 reads a 0
3. CPU 1 writes a 1
2. CPU 2 reads a 0
4. CPU 2 writes a 1
Figure 8-10. The TSL instruction can fail if the bus cannot be locked. These four
steps show a sequence of events where the failure is demonstrated.
To prevent this problem, the TSL instruction must first lock the bus, preventing
other CPUs from accessing it, then do both memory accesses, then unlock the bus.
Typically, locking the bus is done by requesting the bus using the usual bus request
protocol, then asserting (i.e., setting to a logical 1 value) some special bus line until
both cycles have been completed. As long as this special line is being asserted, no
other CPU will be granted bus access. This instruction can only be implemented on
a bus that has the necessary lines and (hardware) protocol for using them. Modern
buses all have these facilities, but on earlier ones that did not, it was not possible to
implement TSL correctly. This is why Peterson’s protocol was invented: to 
synchronize entirely in software (Peterson, 1981).
If TSL is correctly implemented and used, it guarantees that mutual exclusion
can be made to work. However, this mutual exclusion method uses a spin lock
because the requesting CPU just sits in a tight loop testing the lock as fast as it can.
Not only does it completely waste the time of the requesting CPU (or CPUs), but it
may also put a massive load on the bus or memory, seriously slowing down all
other CPUs trying to do their normal work.
At first glance, it might appear that the presence of caching should eliminate
the problem of bus contention, but it does not. In theory, once the requesting CPU
has read the lock word, it should get a copy in its cache. As long as no other CPU
