SEC. 8.3
DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS
595
access procedures, called methods. Processes are not permitted to access the 
variables directly. Instead, they are required to invoke the methods.
Some programming languages, such as C++ and Java, are object oriented, but
these are language-level objects rather than run-time objects. One well-known 
system based on run-time objects is CORBA (Common Object Request Broker
Architecture) (Vinoski, 1997), which first saw light of day in 1991 and was
actively updated until as late as 2012. CORBA is a client-server system, in which
client processes on client machines can invoke operations on objects located on
(possibly remote) server machines. CORBA was designed for a heterogeneous
system running a variety of hardware platforms and operating systems and 
programmed in a variety of languages. To make it possible for a client on one 
platform to invoke a server on a different platform, ORBs (Object Request Brokers)
are interposed between client and server to allow them to match up. The ORBs
play an important role in CORBA, even providing the system with its name.
Each CORBA object is defined by an interface definition in a language called
IDL (Interface Definition Language), which tells what methods the object
exports and what parameter types each one expects. The IDL specification can be
compiled into a client stub procedure and stored in a library. If a client process
knows in advance that it will need to access a certain object, it is linked with the
object’s client stub code. The IDL specification can also be compiled into a 
skeleton procedure that is used on the server side. If it is not known in advance which
CORBA objects a process needs to use, dynamic invocation is also possible, but
how that works is beyond the scope of our treatment.
The function of the ORBs is to hide all the low-level distribution and 
communication details from the client and server code. In particular, the ORBs hide from
the client the location of the server, whether the server is a binary program or a
script, what hardware and operating system the server runs on, whether the object
is currently active, and how the two ORBs communicate (e.g., using TCP/IP, RPC,
or shared memory).
A serious problem with CORBA is that every object is located on only one 
server, which means the performance will be terrible for objects that are heavily used
on client machines around the world. In practice, CORBA functions acceptably
only in small-scale systems, such as to connect processes on one computer, one
LAN, or within a single company.
8.3.6 Coordination-Based Middleware
Our last paradigm for a distributed system is called coordination-based 
middleware. We will discuss it by looking at the Linda system, an academic research
project that started the whole field.
Linda started as a novel system for communication and synchronization 
developed at Yale University by David Gelernter and his student Nick Carriero (Carriero
and Gelernter, 1986; Carriero and Gelernter, 1989; and Gelernter, 1985). In Linda,
