SEC. 4.2
DIRECTORIES
273
common, in part because there was only one user. Interestingly enough, the world’s
first supercomputer, the CDC 6600, also had only a single directory for all files,
ev en though it was used by many users at once. This decision was no doubt made
to keep the software design simple.
An example of a system with one directory is given in Fig. 4-7. Here the
directory contains four files. The advantages of this scheme are its simplicity and
the ability to locate files quickly—there is only one place to look, after all. It is
sometimes still used on simple embedded devices such as digital cameras and
some portable music players.
Root directory
A
B
C
D
Figure 4-7. A single-level directory system containing four files.
Biologist Ernst Haeckel once said ‘‘ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny.’’ It’s not
entirely accurate, but there is a grain of truth in it. Something analogous happens in
the computer world. Some concept was in vogue on, say, mainframe computers,
then discarded as they got more powerful, but picked up later on minicomputers.
Then it was discarded there and later picked up on personal computers. Then it was
discarded there and later picked up further down the food chain.
So we frequently see concepts (like having one directory for all files) no longer
used on powerful computers, but now being used on simple embedded devices like
digital cameras and portable music players. For this reason through this chapter
(and, indeed, the entire book), we will often discuss ideas that were once popular
on mainframes, minicomputers, or personal computers, but have since been 
discarded. Not only is this a good historical lesson, but often these ideas make perfect
sense on yet lower-end devices. The chip on your credit card really does not need
the full-blown hierarchical directory system we are about to explore. The simple
file system used on the CDC 6600 supercomputer in the 1960s will do just fine,
thank you. So when you read about some old concept here, do not think ‘‘how 
oldfashioned.’’ Think: Would that work on an RFID (Radio Frequency IDentification)
chip? that costs 5 cents and is used on a public-transit payment card? It just might.
4.2.2 Hierarchical Directory Systems
The single level is adequate for very simple dedicated applications (and was
ev en used on the first personal computers), but for modern users with thousands of
files, it would be impossible to find anything if all files were in a single directory.
Consequently, a way is needed to group related files together. A professor, for
example, might have a collection of files that together form a book that she is 
writing, a second collection containing student programs submitted for another course,
