SEC. 3.4
PA GE REPLACEMENT ALGORITHMS
215
will run without causing many faults until it moves into another execution phase
(e.g., the next pass of the compiler). If the available memory is too small to hold
the entire working set, the process will cause many page faults and run slowly,
since executing an instruction takes a few nanoseconds and reading in a page from,
say, a disk typically takes 10 msec. At a rate of one or two instructions per 10
msec, it will take ages to finish. A program causing page faults every few 
instructions is said to be thrashing (Denning, 1968b).
In a multiprogramming system, processes are often moved to disk (i.e., all their
pages are removed from memory) to let others have a turn at the CPU. The 
question arises of what to do when a process is brought back in again. Technically,
nothing need be done. The process will just cause page faults until its working set
has been loaded. The problem is that having numerous page faults every time a
process is loaded is slow, and it also wastes considerable CPU time, since it takes
the operating system a few milliseconds of CPU time to process a page fault.
Therefore, many paging systems try to keep track of each process’ working set
and make sure that it is in memory before letting the process run. This approach is
called the working set model (Denning, 1970). It is designed to greatly reduce the
page fault rate. Loading the pages before letting processes run is also called
prepaging. Note that the working set changes over time.
It has long been known that programs rarely reference their address space 
uniformly, but that the references tend to cluster on a small number of pages. A 
memory reference may fetch an instruction or data, or it may store data. At any instant
of time, t, there exists a set consisting of all the pages used by the k most recent
memory references. This set, w(k, t), is the working set. Because the k > 1  most
recent references must have used all the pages used by the k = 1 most recent 
references, and possibly others, w(k, t) is a monotonically nondecreasing function of k.
The limit of w(k, t) as k becomes large is finite because a program cannot 
reference more pages than its address space contains, and few programs will use every
single page. Figure 3-18 depicts the size of the working set as a function of k.
The fact that most programs randomly access a small number of pages, but that
this set changes slowly in time explains the initial rapid rise of the curve and then
the much slower rise for large k. For example, a program that is executing a loop
occupying two pages using data on four pages may reference all six pages every
1000 instructions, but the most recent reference to some other page may be a 
million instructions earlier, during the initialization phase. Due to this asymptotic
behavior, the contents of the working set are not sensitive to the value of k chosen.
To put it differently, there exists a wide range of k values for which the working set
is unchanged. Because the working set varies slowly with time, it is possible to
make a reasonable guess as to which pages will be needed when the program is
restarted on the basis of its working set when it was last stopped. Prepaging 
consists of loading these pages before resuming the process.
To implement the working set model, it is necessary for the operating system
to keep track of which pages are in the working set. Having this information also
