SEC. 9.2
CONTROLLING ACCESS TO RESOURCES
623
specific. Examples of generic rights are destroy object and copy object. These
could hold for any object, no matter what type it is. Object-specific rights might
include append message for a mailbox object and sor t alphabetically for a 
directory object.
So far, our ACL entries have been for individual users. Many systems support
the concept of a group of users. Groups have names and can be included in ACLs.
Tw o variations on the semantics of groups are possible. In some systems, each
process has a user ID (UID) and group ID (GID). In such systems, an ACL entry
contains entries of the form
UID1, GID1: rights1; UID2, GID2: rights2; ...
Under these conditions, when a request is made to access an object, a check is
made using the caller’s UID and GID. If they are present in the ACL, the rights
listed are available. If the (UID, GID) combination is not in the list, the access is
not permitted.
Using groups this way effectively introduces the concept of a role. Consider a
computer installation in which Tana is system administrator, and thus in the group
sysadm. Howev er, suppose that the company also has some clubs for employees
and Tana is a member of the pigeon fanciers club. Club members belong to the
group pigfan and have access to the company’s computers for managing their
pigeon database. A portion of the ACL might be as shown in Fig. 9-7.
File 
Access control list
Password 
tana, sysadm: RW
Pigeon data 
bill, pigfan: RW; tana, pigfan: RW; ...
Figure 9-7. Tw o access control lists.
If Tana tries to access one of these files, the result depends on which group she
is currently logged in as. When she logs in, the system may ask her to choose
which of her groups she is currently using, or there might even be different login
names and/or passwords to keep them separate. The point of this scheme is to 
prevent Tana from accessing the password file when she currently has her pigeon
fancier’s hat on. She can do that only when logged in as the system administrator.
In some cases, a user may have access to certain files independent of which
group she is currently logged in as. That case can be handled by introducing the
concept of a wildcard, which means everyone. For example, the entry
tana, *: RW
for the password file would give Tana access no matter which group she was 
currently in as.
Yet another possibility is that if a user belongs to any of the groups that have
certain access rights, the access is permitted. The advantage here is that a user
