SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
863
only be started when the app was in a state where it was considered okay to do so,
such as any time the app itself was already in the foreground for another reason, or
it was executing in response to something that could be related to a user intent
(such as responding to the aforementioned media button event).
This leaves us at the state of background execution in Android, circa 2021.
Android will, however, continue to evolve; not only to continue to optimize the
battery life it can provide, but also as it has to address the changing behavior of its
application ecosystem and expectations of its users.
10.9 SUMMARY
In this chapter we have looked at two examples in detail: Linux and Android,
which built on top on Linux. Linux has been around now for a bit over 30 years
and has grown from a hobby project by one person who wanted a production 
version of MINIX to a large and powerful system that powers most of the Internet. It
is also the most successful open-source project in history.
We started with a brief overview of the user interface and the shell, with some
examples of what you can do on the command line. Then we took a brief look at
some of the standard UNIX programs that are available in Linux. Next we saw
how Linux is structured in layers.
After that we moved onto the core of the Linux material, how it works inside.
This included processes and threads, memory management, input/output, the file
system, and, of course, security. For each of these we showed some of the system
calls available and how they are implemented. Then we moved on to Android,
which is layered on top of Linux. Linux itself is mostly used on desktops, 
notebooks, and servers but Android is aimed at mobile devices such as smartphones
and tablets. This changes its goals and requirements considerably. For example,
how long it takes to start a program is of only minor interest on notebooks, but it is
crucial on mobile devices. Notebook users really don’t mind if Word takes 3 
seconds to start, but smartphone users would go crazy if hitting the app to make a
phone call took 3 seconds to boot. This simple difference in goals has vast 
implications for the respective designs.
Another enormous difference between Linux and Android is that while Linux
tries to avoid wasting energy, Android goes to great lengths to prevent draining the
battery to fast. A smartphone whose battery lasted only 4 hours would not be a big
hit.
After going over tge design goals and history of Android, we took a look at the
system architecture. Then we studied the innards in detail, includng ART, binder
IPC, how apps work, intents, and the Android process model. Next come the 
everimportant security, which has evolved over the years in Android as it has become
more important. Finally we looked at background execution, which is quite 
different from how it is done on desktops and notebooks.
