278
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
A variant on the idea of linking files is the symbolic link (sometimes called a
shortcut or alias). Instead, of having two names point to the same internal data
structure representing a file, a name can be created that points to a tiny file naming
another file. When the first file is used, for example, opened, the file system 
follows the path and finds the name at the end. Then it starts the lookup process all
over using the new name. Symbolic links have the advantage that they can cross
disk boundaries and even name files on remote computers. Their implementation is
somewhat less efficient than hard links though.
4.3 FILE-SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
Now it is time to turn from the user’s view of the file system to the 
implementor’s view. Users are concerned with how files are named, what operations are
allowed on them, what the directory tree looks like, and similar interface issues.
Implementers are interested in how files and directories are stored, how disk space
is managed, and how to make everything work efficiently and reliably. In the 
following sections, we will examine a number of these areas to see what the issues
and trade-offs are.
4.3.1 File-System Layout
File systems are stored on disks. Most disks can be divided up into one or
more partitions, with independent file systems on each partition. The layout
depends on whether you have an old computer with a BIOS and a master boot
record, or a modern UEFI-based system.
Old School: The Master Boot Record
On older systems, sector 0 of the disk is called the MBR (Master Boot
Record) and is used to boot the computer. The end of the MBR contains the 
partition table. This table gives the starting and ending addresses of each partition. One
of the partitions in the table is marked as active. When the computer is booted, the
BIOS reads in and executes the MBR. The first thing the MBR program does is
locate the active partition, read in its first block, which is called the boot block,
and execute it. The program in the boot block loads the operating system contained
in that partition. For uniformity, every partition starts with a boot block, even if it
does not contain a bootable operating system. Besides, it might contain one in the
future.
Other than starting with a boot block, the layout of a disk partition varies a lot
from file system to file system. Often the file system will contain some of the items
shown in Fig. 4-10. The first one is the superblock. It contains all the key 
parameters about the file system and is read into memory when the computer is booted or
