640
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
Siemens computers controlling the centrifuges used a default password—one that
had been circulating on the Internet for years.
The growth of the Web has made the problem worse. Instead of having only
one password, many people now hav e dozens or hundreds. Since remembering
them all is too hard, they tend to choose simple, weak passwords and reuse them
on many Websites (Florencio and Herley, 2007; and Taiabul Haque et al., 2013).
Does it really matter if passwords are easy to guess? Yes, absolutely. In 1998,
the San Jose Mercury News reported that a Berkeley resident, Peter Shipley, had
set up several unused computers as war dialers, which dialed all 10,000 telephone
numbers belonging to an exchange [e.g., (415) 770-xxxx], usually in random order
to thwart telephone companies that frown upon such usage and try to detect it.
After making 2.6 million calls, he located 20,000 computers in the Bay Area, 200
of which had no security at all.
The Internet has been a godsend to crackers. It takes all the drudgery out of
their work. No more phone numbers to dial (and no more dial tones to wait for).
‘‘War dialing’’ now works like this. A cracker may write a script ping (send a 
network packet) to a set of IP addresses. If it receives any response at all, the script
subsequently tries to set up a TCP connection to all the possible services that may
be running on the machine. As mentioned earlier, this mapping out of what is 
running on which computer is known as portscanning and instead of writing a script
from scratch, the attacker may just as well use specialized tools like nmap that 
provide a wide range of advanced portscanning techniques. Now that the attacker
knows which servers are running on which machine, the next step is to launch the
attack. For instance, if the attacker wanted to probe the password protection, he
would connect to those services that use this method of authentication, like the 
telnet or ssh servers, or even Web servers. We hav e already seen that default and
otherwise weak password enable attackers to harvest a large number of accounts,
sometimes with full administrator rights.
UNIX Password Security
Some (older) operating systems keep the password file on the disk in
unencrypted form (plaintext), but protected by the usual system protection 
mechanisms. Having all the passwords in a disk file in unencrypted form is just looking for
trouble because all too often many people have access to it. These may include 
system administrators, machine operators, maintenance personnel, programmers,
management, and maybe even some secretaries.
A better solution, used in UNIX systems, works like this. The login program
asks the user to type his name and password. The password is immediately
‘‘encrypted’’ by using it as a key to encrypt a fixed block of data. Effectively, a
one-way function is being run, with the password as input and a function of the
password as output. This process is not really encryption, but it is easier to speak
of it as ‘‘encryption.’’ The login program then reads the password file, which is just
