1020
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
In Windows 10 and newer releases, password-less authentication schemes are
preferred over passwords, which are either hard-to-remember or easy-to-guess.
Windows Hello is the umbrella name for the set of password-less authentication
technologies users can use to log into Windows. Hello supports biometrics-based
face, iris, and fingerprint recognition as well as per-device PIN. The data path from
the infrared camera hardware to the VTL1 trustlet that implements face recognition
is protected against VTL0 access via Virtualization-based Security memory and
IOMMU protections. Biometric data is encrypted by the trustlet and stored on disk.
Discretionary access controls allow the owner of a file or other object to say
who can use it and in what way. Privileged access controls allow the system 
administrator (superuser) to override them when needed. Address-space protection
simply means that each process has its own protected virtual address space not
accessible by any unauthorized process. The next item means that when the 
process heap grows, the pages mapped in are initialized to zero so that processes cannot
find any old information put there by the previous owner (hence the zeroed page
list in Fig. 11-37, which provides a supply of zeroed pages for this purpose). 
Finally, security auditing allows the administrator to produce a log of certain 
security-related events.
While the Orange Book does not specify what is to happen when someone
steals your notebook computer, in large organizations one theft a week is not
unusual. Consequently, Windows provides tools that a conscientious user can use
to minimize the damage when a notebook is stolen or lost (e.g., secure login,
encrypted files, etc.). In addition, organizations can use a mechanism called Group
Policy to push down such secure machine configuration for all of its users before
they can gain access to corporate network resources.
In the next section, we will describe the basic concepts behind Windows 
security. After that we will look at the security system calls. Finally, we will conclude
by seeing how security is implemented and learn about Windows’ defenses against
online threats.
11.11.1 Fundamental Concepts
Every Windows user (and group) is identified by an SID (Security ID). SIDs
are binary numbers with a short header followed by a long random component.
Each SID is intended to be unique worldwide. When a user starts up a process, the
process and its threads run under the user’s SID. Most of the security system is
designed to make sure that each object can be accessed only by threads with 
authorized SIDs.
Each process has an access token that specifies an SID and other properties.
The token is normally created by winlogon, as described below. The format of the
token is shown in Fig. 11-55. Processes can call GetTokenInfor mation to acquire
this information. The header contains some administrative information. The 
expiration time field could tell when the token ceases to be valid, but it is currently not
