SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
377
Tall buildings also have to deal with this trade-off. The problem of scheduling
an elevator in a tall building is similar to that of scheduling a disk arm. Requests
come in continuously calling the elevator to floors (cylinders) at random. The 
computer running the elevator could easily keep track of the sequence in which 
customers pushed the call button and service them using FCFS or SSF.
However, most elevators use a different algorithm in order to reconcile the
mutually conflicting goals of efficiency and fairness. They keep moving in the
same direction until there are no more outstanding requests in that direction, then
they switch directions. This algorithm, known both in the disk world and the 
elevator world as the elevator algorithm, requires the software to maintain 1 bit: the
current direction bit, UP or DOWN. When a request finishes, the disk or elevator
driver checks the bit. If it is UP, the arm or cabin is moved to the next highest
pending request. If no requests are pending at higher positions, the direction bit is
reversed. When the bit is set to DOWN, the move is to the next lowest requested
position, if any. If no request is pending, it just stops and waits. In big office 
towers, when there are no requests pending, the software might send the cabin to the
ground floor, since it is more likely to be need there shortly than on, say, the 19th
floor. Disk software does not usually try to speculatively preposition the head 
anywhere.
Figure 5-23 shows the elevator algorithm using the same seven requests as
Fig. 5-22, assuming the direction bit was initially UP. The order in which the 
cylinders are serviced is 12, 16, 34, 36, 9, and 1, which yields arm motions of 1, 4, 18,
2, 27, and 8, for a total of 60 cylinders. In this case, the elevator algorithm is 
slightly better than SSF, although it is usually worse. One nice property the elevator
algorithm has is that given any collection of requests, the upper bound on the total
motion is fixed: it is just twice the number of cylinders.
Initial!
position
Cylinder
X
X
X X
X
X
X
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time
Sequence of seeks
Figure 5-23. The elevator algorithm for scheduling disk requests.
A slight modification of this algorithm that has a smaller variance in response
times (Teory, 1972) is to always scan in the same direction. When the 
highest-numbered cylinder with a pending request has been serviced, the arm goes to the
