960
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
memory. The memory manager implements this by marking the page as read-only
after it is loaded. The first time a thread attempts to write the page the memory
manager will detect this situation and free the pagefile page, grant write access to
the page, and then have the thread try again.
Windows supports up to 16 pagefiles, normally spread out over separate disks
to achieve higher I/O bandwidth. Each one has an initial size and a maximum size
it can grow to later if needed, but it is better to create these files to be the 
maximum size at system installation time. If it becomes necessary to grow a pagefile
when the file system is much fuller, it is likely that the new space in the pagefile
will be highly fragmented, reducing performance.
The operating system keeps track of which virtual page maps onto which part
of which paging file by writing this information into the page table entries for the
process for private pages, or into prototype page table entries associated with the
section object for shared pages. In addition to the pages that are backed by the
pagefile, many pages in a process are mapped to regular files in the file system.
The executable code and read-only data in a program file (e.g., an EXE or
DLL) can be mapped into the address space of whatever process is using it. Since
these pages cannot be modified, they nev er need to be paged out and end up on the
standby list as cached pages when they are no longer in use and can immediately
be reused. When the page is needed again in the future, the memory manager will
read the page in from the program file.
Sometimes pages that start out as read-only end up being modified, for 
example, setting a breakpoint in the code when debugging a process, or fixing up code
to relocate it to different addresses within a process, or making modifications to
data pages that started out shared. In cases like these, Windows, like most modern
operating systems, supports a type of page called copy-on-write. These pages
start out as ordinary mapped pages, but when an attempt is made to modify any
part of the page the memory manager makes a private, writable copy. It then
updates the page table for the virtual page so that it points at the private copy and
has the thread retry the write—which will succeed the second time. If that copy
later needs to be paged out, it will be written to the pagefile rather than the original
file,
Besides mapping program code and data from EXE and DLL files, ordinary
files can be mapped into memory, allowing programs to reference data from files
without doing read and write operations. I/O operations are still needed, but they
are provided implicitly by the memory manager using the section object to 
represent the mapping between pages in memory and the blocks in the files on disk.
Section objects do not have to refer to a file. They can refer to anonymous
regions of memory, called pagefile-backed sections. By mapping pagefile-backed
section objects into multiple processes, memory can be shared without having to
allocate a file on disk. Since sections can be given names in the NT namespace,
processes can rendezvous by opening sections by name, as well as by duplicating
and passing handles between processes.
