SEC. 11.8
THE WINDOWS NT FILE SYSTEM
997
list of extension MFT records is made nonresident (i.e., stored in other disk blocks
instead of in the base MFT record). Then it can grow as large as needed.
An MFT entry for a small directory is shown in Fig. 11-48. The record 
contains a number of directory entries, each of which describes one file or directory.
Each entry has a fixed-length structure followed by a variable-length file name.
The fixed part contains the index of the MFT entry for the file, the length of the file
name, and a variety of other fields and flags. Looking for an entry in a directory
consists of examining all the file names in turn.
Standard
info header
Index root
header
Standard
info
Unused
Record
header
A directory entry contains the MFT index for the file, 
the length of the file name, the file name itself, 
and various fields and flags
Figure 11-48. The MFT record for a small directory.
Large directories use a different format. Instead, of listing the files linearly, a
B+ tree is used to make alphabetical lookup possible and to make it easy to insert
new names in the directory in the proper place.
We now hav e enough information to finish describing how file-name lookup
occurs for a file \ ?? \ C: \ foo \ bar. In Fig. 11-20, we saw how the Win32, the
native NT system calls, and the object and I/O managers cooperated to open a file
by sending an I/O request to the NTFS device stack for the C: volume. The I/O
request asks NTFS to fill in a file object for the remaining path name, \ foo \ bar.
The NTFS parsing of the path \ foo \ bar begins at the root directory for C:,
whose blocks can be found from entry 5 in the MFT (see Fig. 11-44). The string
‘‘foo’’ is looked up in the root directory, which returns the index into the MFT for
the directory foo. This directory is then searched for the string ‘‘bar,’’ which refers
to the MFT record for this file. NTFS performs access checks by calling back into
the security reference monitor, and if access checks pass, it searches the MFT
record for the attribute ::$DATA, which is the default data stream.
Having found file bar, NTFS will set pointers to its own metadata in the file
object passed down from the I/O manager. The metadata includes a pointer to the
MFT record, information about compression and range locks, various details about
sharing, and so on. Most of this metadata is in data structures shared across all file
objects referring to the file. A few fields are specific only to the current open, such
as whether the file should be deleted when it is closed. Once the open has 
succeeded, NTFS calls IoCompleteRequest to pass the IRP back up the I/O stack to
the I/O and object managers. Ultimately a handle for the file object is put in the
handle table for the current process, and control is passed back to user mode. On
