SEC. 13.1
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING
1091
memory, hard disk, tape, and, as we saw earlier, even DNA. In this article, the 
various technologies are surveyed and their strengths and weaknesses highlighted.
Greengard, ‘‘The Future of Data Storage’’
There may be many fancy new materials for storing bytes, but in practice good
old magnetic tape will be with us for a long while yet, explains this article. Tape is
inexpensive and the data on it remain accessible longer than on many other media.
It is also easy to use and manage.
Stan and Skadron, ‘‘Power-Aware Computing’’
Until someone manages to get Moore’s Law to apply to batteries, energy usage
is going to continue to be a major issue in mobile devices. Power and heat are so
critical these days that operating systems are aware of the CPU temperature and
adapt their behavior to it. This article surveys some of the issues and serves as an
introduction to fiv e other articles in this special issue of Computer on power-aware
computing.
Swanson and Caulfield, ‘‘Refactor, Reduce, Recycle: Restructuring the I/O Stack
for the Future of Storage’’
Disks exist for two reasons: when power is turned off, RAM loses its contents.
Also, disks are very big. But suppose RAM did not lose its contents when 
powered off? How would that change the I/O stack? Nonvolatile memory is here and
this article looks at how it changes systems.
Ion, ‘‘From Touch Displays to the Surface: A Brief History of Touchscreen Tech.,’’
Touch screens have become ubiquitous in a short time span. This article traces
the history of the touch screen through history with easy-to-understand 
explanations and nice vintage pictures and videos. Fascinating stuff!
Walker and Cragon, ‘‘Interrupt Processing in Concurrent Processors’’
Implementing precise interrupts on superscalar computers is a challenging
activity. The trick is to serialize the state and do it quickly. A number of the design
issues and trade-offs are discussed here.
13.1.6 Deadlocks
Coffman et al., ‘‘System Deadlocks’’
A short introduction to deadlocks, what causes them, and how they can be 
prevented or detected.
Holt, ‘‘Some Deadlock Properties of Computer Systems’’
A discussion of deadlocks. Holt introduces a directed graph model that can be
used to analyze some deadlock situations.
