20
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
Apple’s iOS (released for the first iPhone in 2007) started eating into Symbian’s
market share. Many expected that RIM would dominate the business market, while
iOS would dominate on consumer devices. Symbian’s market share plummeted. In
2011, Nokia ditched Symbian and announced it would focus on Windows Phone as
its primary platform. For some time, Apple and RIM were the toast of the town
(although not nearly as dominant as Symbian had been), but it did not take very
long for Android, a Linux-based operating system released by Google in 2008, to
overtake all its rivals.
For phone manufacturers, Android had the advantage that it was open source
and available under a permissive license. As a result, they could tinker with it and
adapt it to their own hardware with ease. Also, it has a huge community of 
developers writing apps, mostly in the familiar Java programming language. Even so,
the past years have shown that the dominance may not last, and Android’s 
competitors are eager to claw back some of its market share. We will look at Android in
detail in Sec. 10.8.
1.3 COMPUTER HARDWARE REVIEW
An operating system is intimately tied to the hardware of the computer it runs
on. It extends the computer’s instruction set and manages its resources. To work,
it must know a great deal about the hardware, at least about how the hardware
appears to the programmer. For this reason, let us briefly review computer 
hardware as found in modern personal computers. After that, we can start getting into
the details of what operating systems do and how they work.
Conceptually, a simple personal computer can be abstracted to a model 
resembling that of Fig. 1-6. The CPU, memory, and I/O devices are all connected by a
system bus and communicate with one another over it. Modern personal computers
have a more complicated structure, involving multiple buses, which we will look at
later. For the time being, this model will be sufficient. In the following sections,
we will briefly review these components and examine some of the hardware issues
that are of concern to operating system designers. Needless to say, this will be a
very compact summary. Many books have been written on the subject of computer
hardware and computer organization. Two well-known ones are by Tanenbaum
and Austin (2012) and Patterson and Hennessy (2018).
1.3.1 Processors
The ‘‘brain’’ of the computer is the CPU. It fetches instructions from memory
and executes them. The basic cycle of every CPU is to fetch the first instruction
from memory, decode it to determine its type and operands, execute it, and then
fetch, decode, and execute subsequent instructions. The cycle is repeated until the
program finishes. In this way, programs are carried out.
