SEC. 10.2
OVERVIEW OF LINUX
719
commands are called shell scripts. Shell scripts may assign values to shell 
variables and then read them later. They may also have parameters, and use if, for,
while, and case constructs. Thus a shell script is really a program written in shell
language. The Berkeley C shell is an alternative shell designed to make shell
scripts (and the command language in general) look like C  programs in many
respects. Since the shell is just another user program, other people have written and
distributed a variety of other shells. Users are free to choose whatever shells they
like.
10.2.4 Linux Utility Programs
The command-line (shell) user interface to Linux consists of a large number of
standard utility programs. Roughly speaking, these programs can be divided into
six categories, as follows:
1. File and directory manipulation commands.
2. Filters.
3. Program development tools, such as editors and compilers.
4. Text processing.
5. System administzration.
6. Miscellaneous.
The POSIX 1003.1-2017 standard specifies the syntax and semantics of 160 of
these, primarily in the first three categories. The idea of standardizing them is to
make it possible for anyone to write shell scripts that use these programs and work
on all Linux systems.
In addition to these standard utilities, there are many application programs as
well, of course, such as Web browsers, media players, image viewers, office suites,
games, and so on.
Let us consider some examples of these programs, starting with file and 
directory manipulation.
cp a b
copies file a to b, leaving the original file intact. In contrast,
mv a b
copies a to b but removes the original. In effect, it moves the file rather than really
making a copy in the usual sense. Several files can be concatenated using cat,
which reads each of its input files and copies them all to standard output, one after
another. Files can be removed by the rm command. The chmod command allows
the owner to change the rights bits to modify access permissions. Directories can
