174
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
parent’s threads. Suppose that one of the original threads was waiting for keyboard
input. Now two threads are waiting for keyboard input, one in each process. Does this
problem ever occur in single-threaded processes?
12. In Fig. 2-8, a multithreaded Web server is shown. If the only way to read from a file is
the normal blocking read system call, do you think user-level threads or kernel-level
threads are being used for the Web server? Why?
13. In the text, we described a multithreaded Web server, showing why it is better than a
single-threaded server and a finite-state machine server. Are there any circumstances in
which a single-threaded server might be better? Give an example.
14. In Fig. 2-11 the register set is listed as a per-thread rather than a per-process item.
Why? After all, the machine has only one set of registers.
15. Why would a thread ever voluntarily give up the CPU by calling thread yield? After
all, since there is no periodic clock interrupt, it may never get the CPU back.
16. Can a thread ever be preempted by a clock interrupt? If so, under what circumstances?
If not, why not?
17. In this problem, you are to compare reading a file using a single-threaded file server
and a multithreaded server. It takes 12 msec to get a request for work, dispatch it, and
do the rest of the necessary processing, assuming that the data needed are in the block
cache. If a disk operation is needed, as is the case one-third of the time, an additional
75 msec is required, during which time the thread sleeps. How many requests/sec can
the server handle if it is single threaded? If it is multithreaded?
18. What is the biggest advantage of implementing threads in user space? What is the 
biggest disadvantage?
19. In Fig. 2-14 the thread creations and messages printed by the threads are interleaved at
random. Is there a way to force the order to be strictly thread 1 created, thread 1 prints
message, thread 1 exits, thread 2 created, thread 2 prints message, thread 2 exists, and
so on? If so, how? If not, why not?
20. In the discussion on global variables in threads, we used a procedure create global to
allocate storage for a pointer to the variable, rather than the variable itself. Is this
essential, or could the procedures work with the values themselves just as well?
21. Consider a system in which threads are implemented entirely in user space, with the
run-time system getting a clock interrupt once a second. Suppose that a clock interrupt
occurs exactly while some thread executing in the run-time system is at the point of
blocking or unblocking a thread. What problem might occur? Can you solve it?
22. Suppose that an operating system does not have anything like the select system call to
see in advance if it is safe to read from a file, pipe, or device, but it does allow alarm
clocks (timers) to be set that interrupt blocked system calls. Is it possible to implement
in user space a threads package that will not block all threads when one thread 
performs a system call that may block? Explain your answer.
23. Does the busy waiting solution using the turn variable (Fig. 2-23) work when the two
processes are running on a shared-memory multiprocessor, that is, two CPUs sharing a
common memory?
