SEC. 9.4
AUTHENTICATION
639
can change the boot sequence. If you have a notebook computer, stop reading now.
Go put a password on your BIOS, then come back.
Another thing that modern systems tend to do is encrypt all content on your
drive. This is a good thing. It ensures that even if attackers manage to read the raw
blocks from your drive, they will see only garbled data. Again, if you do not have
this enabled, put down this book and go fix this first.
Weak Passwords
Often, crackers break in simply by connecting to the target computer (e.g.,
over the Internet) and trying many (login name, password) combinations until they
find one that works. Many people use their own name in one form or another as
their login name. For someone whose full name is ‘‘Ellen Ann Smith,’’ ellen,
smith, ellen smith, ellen-smith, ellen.smith, esmith, easmith, and eas are all 
reasonable candidates. Armed with one of those books entitled 4096 Names for Your
New Baby, plus a telephone book full of last names, a cracker can easily compile a
computerized list of potential login names appropriate to the country being 
attack%ed (ellen smith might work fine in the United States or England, but 
probably not in Japan).
Of course, guessing the login name is not enough. The password has to be
guessed, too. How hard is that? Easier than you think. The classic work on 
password security was done by Morris and Thompson (1979) on UNIX systems. They
compiled a list of likely passwords: first and last names, street names, city names,
words from a moderate-sized dictionary (also words spelled backward), 
syntactically valid license plate numbers, etc. They then compared their list to the system
password file to see if there were any matches. Over 86% of all passwords turned
up in their list.
Lest anyone think that better-quality users pick better-quality passwords, rest
assured that they do not. When in 2012, 6.4 million LinkedIn (hashed) passwords
leaked to the Web after a hack, many people had fun analyzing the results. The
most popular password was ‘‘password.’’ The second most popular was ‘‘123456’’
(‘‘1234’’, ‘‘12345’’, and ‘‘12345678’’ were also in the top 10). Not exactly
uncrackable. In fact, crackers can compile a list of potential login names and a list
of potential passwords without much work and run a program to try them on as
many computers as they can.
This is similar to what researchers at IOActive did a few years back. They
scanned a long list of home routers and set-top boxes to see if they were vulnerable
to the simplest possible attack. Rather than trying out many login names and 
passwords, as we suggested, they tried only the well-known default login and password
installed by the manufacturers. Users are supposed to change these values 
immediately, but it appears that many do not. The researchers found that hundreds of
thousands of such devices are potentially vulnerable. Perhaps even more worrying,
the Stuxnet attack on an Iranian nuclear facility made good use of the fact that the
