892
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
boots, a hive named SYSTEM is loaded into memory by the boot program that
loads the kernel and other boot files, such as boot drivers, from the boot volume.
Windows keeps much crucial information in the SYSTEM hive, including 
information about what drivers to use with what devices, what software to run 
initially, and many parameters governing the operation of the system. This 
information is used even by the boot program itself to determine which drivers are boot
drivers, being needed immediately upon boot. Such drivers include those that
understand the file system and disk drivers for the volume containing the operating
system itself.
Other configuration hives are used after the system boots to describe 
information about the software installed on the system, particular users, and the classes
of user-mode COM (Component Object-Model) objects that are installed on the
system. Login information for local users is kept in the SAM (Security Access
Manager) hiv e. Information for network users is maintained by the lsass service
in the security hive and coordinated with the network directory servers so that
users can have a common account name and password across an entire network. A
list of the hives used in Windows is shown in Fig. 11-9.
Hive file
Mounted name
Use
SYSTEM 
HKLM \SYSTEM 
OS configuration infor mation, used by ker nel
HARDWARE 
HKLM \HARDWARE 
In-memory hive recording hardware detected
BCD 
HKLM \BCD* 
Boot Configuration Database
SAM 
HKLM \SAM 
Local user account infor mation
SECURITY 
HKLM \SECURITY 
lsass’ account and other security infor mation
DEFAULT 
HKEY USERS \.DEFAULT 
Default hive for new users
NTUSER.DAT 
HKEY USERS \<user id> 
User-specific hive, kept in home directory
SOFTWARE 
HKLM \SOFTWARE 
Application classes registered by COM
COMPONENTS 
HKLM \COMPONENTS 
Manifests and dependencies for sys. components
Figure 11-9. The registry hives in Windows. HKLM is a shorthand for
HKEY LOCAL MACHINE.
Prior to the introduction of the registry, configuration information in Windows
was kept in hundreds of .ini (initialization) files spread across the disk. The registry
gathers these files into a central store, which is available early in the process of
booting the system. This is important for implementing Windows plug-and-play
functionality. Unfortunately, the registry has become very seriously disorganized
over time as Windows has evolved. There are poorly defined conventions about
how the configuration information should be arranged, and many applications take
an ad hoc approach, leading to interference between them. Also, even though most
applications do not, by default, run with administrative privileges, they can escalate
to get full privileges and modify system parameters in the registry directly, 
potentially destabilizing the system. Fixing the registry would break a lot of software.
