1078
OPERATING SYSTEM DESIGN
CHAP. 12
One way to do this is to keep a bit in the process table that tells whether an
alarm is pending. If the bit is off, the easy path is followed (just add a new 
timerqueue entry without checking). If the bit is on, the timer queue must be checked.
12.5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Programmers are perpetual optimists. Most of them think that the way to write
a program is to run to the keyboard and start typing. Shortly thereafter, the fully
debugged program is finished. For very large programs, it does not quite work like
that. In the following sections, we have a bit to say about managing large software
projects, especially large operating system projects.
12.5.1 The Mythical Man Month
In his classic book, The Mythical Man Month, Fred Brooks, one of the 
designers of OS/360, who later moved to academia, addresses the question of why it is so
hard to build big operating systems (Brooks, 1975, 1995). When most 
programmers see his claim that programmers can produce only 1000 lines of debugged
code per year on large projects, they wonder whether Prof. Brooks is living in
outer space, perhaps on Planet Bug. After all, most of them can remember an all
nighter when they produced a 1000-line program in one night. How could this be
the annual output of anybody who got a passing grade in Programming 101?
What Brooks pointed out is that large projects, with hundreds of programmers,
are completely different than small projects and that the results obtained from
small projects do not scale to large ones. In a large project, a huge amount of time
is consumed planning how to divide the work into modules, carefully specifying
the modules and their interfaces, and trying to imagine how the modules will 
interact, even before coding begins. Then the modules have to be coded and debugged
in isolation. Finally, the modules have to be integrated and the system as a whole
has to be tested. The normal case is that each module works perfectly when tested
by itself, but the system crashes instantly when all the pieces are put together.
Brooks estimated the work as being
1/3 Planning
1/6 Coding
1/4 Module testing
1/4 System testing
In other words, writing the code is the easy part. The hard part is figuring out what
the modules should be and making module A correctly talk to module B. In a
small program written by a single programmer, all that is left over is the easy part.
The title of Brooks’ book comes from his assertion that people and time are
not interchangeable. There is no such unit as a man-month. If a project takes 15
