SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
375
interleaving, the controller should be able to buffer an entire track. With hundreds
of MB of memory, most modern controllers can buffer many entire tracks.
After low-level formatting is completed, the disk is partitioned. Logically, each
partition is like a separate disk. Partitions are needed to allow multiple operating
systems to coexist. Also, in some cases, a partition can be used for swapping. In
older other computers, sector 0 contains the MBR (Master Boot Record), which
contains some boot code plus the partition table at the end. The MBR, and thus
support for partition tables, first appeared in IBM PCs in 1983 to support the 
thenmassive 10-MB hard drive in the PC XT. Disks have grown a bit since then. As
MBR partition entries in most systems are limited to 32 bits, the maximum disk
size that can be supported with 512 B sectors is 2 TB. For this reason, most 
operating since now also support the new GPT (GUID Partition Table), which supports
disk sizes up to 9.4 ZB (9,444,732,965,739,290,426,880 bytes or some 8 ZiB). At
the time this book went to press, this was considered a lot of bytes.
The partition table gives the starting sector and size of each partition. You can
see more about the GPT in UEFI in Sec. 4.3. If there are four partitions and all of
them are for Windows, they will be called C:, D:, E:, and F: and treated as separate
drives. If three of them are for Windows and one is for UNIX, then Windows will
call its partitions C:, D:, and E:. If a USB drive is added, it will be F:. To be able
to boot from the hard disk, one partition must be marked as active in the partition
table.
The final step in preparing a disk for use is to perform a high-level format of
each partition (separately). This operation lays down a boot block, the free storage
administration (free list or bitmap), root directory, and an empty file system. It
also puts a code in the partition table entry telling which file system is used in the
partition because many operating systems support multiple incompatible file 
systems (for historical reasons). At this point the system can be booted.
We already saw in Chap. 1 that when the power is turned on, the BIOS runs
initially and reads the GPT. It then finds the appropriate bootloader and executes i
to boot the operating system.
Disk Arm Scheduling Algorithms
In this section, we will look at some issues related to disk drivers in general.
First, consider how long it takes to read or write a disk block. The time required is
determined by three factors:
1. Seek time (the time to move the arm to the proper cylinder).
2. Rotational delay (how long for the proper sector to appear under the
reading head).
3. Actual data transfer time.
For most disks, the seek time dominates the other two times, so reducing the mean
seek time can improve system performance substantially.
