994
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
name. If the actual file name conforms to the MS-DOS 8 + 3 naming rule, a 
secondary MS-DOS name is not needed.
In NT 4.0, security information was put in an attribute, but in Windows 2000
and later, security information all goes into a single file so that multiple files can
share the same security descriptions. This results in significant savings in space
within most MFT records and in the file system overall because the security info
for so many of the files owned by each user is identical.
The attribute list is needed in case the attributes do not fit in the MFT record.
This attribute then tells where to find the extension records. Each entry in the list
contains a 48-bit index into the MFT telling where the extension record is and a
16-bit sequence number to allow verification that the extension record and base
records match up.
NTFS files have an ID associated with them that is like the i-node number in
UNIX. Files can be opened by ID, but the IDs assigned by NTFS are not always
useful when the ID must be persisted because it is based on the MFT record and
can change if the record for the file moves (e.g., if the file is restored from backup).
NTFS allows a separate object ID attribute which can be set on a file and never
needs to change. It can be kept with the file if it is copied to a new volume.
The reparse point tells the procedure parsing the file name that it has do
something special. This mechanism is used for explicitly mounting file systems
and for symbolic links. The two volume attributes are used only for volume 
identification. The next three attributes deal with how directories are implemented.
Small ones are just lists of files but large ones are implemented using B+ trees. The
logged utility stream attribute is used by the encrypting file system.
Finally, we come to the attribute that is the most important of all: the data
stream (or in some cases, streams). An NTFS file has one or more data streams
associated with it. This is where the payload is. The default data stream is
unnamed (i.e., dirpath \ file name::$DATA), but the alternate data streams each
have a name, for example, dirpath \ file name:streamname:$DATA.
For each stream, the stream name, if present, goes in this attribute header. 
Following the header is either a list of disk addresses telling which blocks the stream
contains, or for streams of only a few hundred bytes (and there are many of these),
the stream itself. Putting the actual stream data in the MFT record is called an
immediate file (Mullender and Tanenbaum, 1984).
Of course, most of the time the data does not fit in the MFT record, so this
attribute is usually nonresident. Let us now take a look at how NTFS keeps track
of the location of nonresident attributes, in particular, data.
Storage Allocation
The model for keeping track of disk blocks is that they are assigned in runs of
consecutive blocks, where possible, for efficiency reasons. For example, if the first
logical block of a stream is placed in block 20 on the disk, then the system will try
