682
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
possible to verify a small operating system kernel against a formal specification to
prove that processes are properly isolated (Klein et al. 2009). Frankly, this is
incredibly cool. Others have applied formal methods to compilers and other 
programs.
An obvious limitation of formal verification is that it is only as good as the
specification. If you make a mistake in the specification, the software may be 
vulnerable even though it was verified. Another problem is most of the proofs concern
themselves solely with software, while assuming the hardware to be correct. As we
saw earlier, hardware vulnerabilities make short work of such assumptions.
Besides hardware issues that leak information (e.g., via cache side channels or
transient execution attacks), there are other hardware bugs that cause memory 
corruption. For instance, the circuits that encode bits in memory chips are packed so
closely together, that reading or writing a value in one location in memory may
interfere with the value in a location adjacent to it on the chip. Note that such 
locations are not necessarily close to each other in terms of the virtual or even physical
addresses as seen by the software—DRAM memory may internally remap 
addresses to chip locations in wonderfully complex ways. By aggressively accessing one
or a few locations in memory in quick repetition, the interference may build up and
ev entually cause a bit flip in the neighboring location. This sounds like magic, but
yes, it is possible to change one value in memory (for instance, a value in the 
kernel) by reading another value at a completely unrelated address (for instance, in
your own address space). The problem is known as the Rowhammer 
vulnerability. The exact nature of Rowhammer attacks is beyond this book and we will not
discuss it further, except to add that, unfortunately, few formal software proofs take
into account magic. For more information about it, see Kim et al. (2014), Konoth
et al. (2018), Kim et al. (2020), and Hassan et al. (2021).
A more practical problem of the use of formal methods is that generating
proofs for complex software is difficult to scale and massive software projects such
as the Linux or Windows kernel are well beyond what we can achieve with formal
verification. As a result, most of the software that we use today is riddled with
vulnerabilities. Operating systems therefore protect themselves against attacks by
means of software hardening.
9.8.1 Fine-Grained Randomization
We already discussed how randomization of the address space through Address
Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) makes it difficult for attackers to find 
gadgets for their ROP attacks. Nowadays, all mainstream operating systems apply a
form of ASLR. When applied to the kernel, it is known as KASLR.
Just how randomized is that kernel? The amount of randomness is called the
entropy and is expressed in bits. Suppose an operating system kernel lives in an
address range of 1 GB (230 bytes) and is aligned to a 2 MB page boundary. The
alignment means that the code can start at any address that is a multiple of the page
