SEC. 7.11
CASE STUDY: VMWARE
513
VMM
Shared modules
(shadow MMU, I/O handling, …)
Direct Execution
Binary translation
Decision
Alg.
Figure 7-8. High-level components of the VMware virtual machine monitor (in
the absence of hardware support).
1. The virtual machine is currently running in kernel mode (ring 0 in the
x86 architecture).
2. The virtual machine can disable interrupts and issue I/O instructions
(in the x86 architecture, when the I/O privilege level is set to the ring
level).
3. The virtual machine is currently running in real mode, a legacy 16-bit
execution mode used by the BIOS among other things.
The actual decision algorithm contains a few additional conditions. The details
can be found in Bugnion et al. (2012). Interestingly, the algorithm does not depend
on the instructions that are stored in memory and may be executed, but only on the
value of a few virtual registers; therefore, it can be evaluated very efficiently in just
a handful of instructions.
The second key insight was that by properly configuring the hardware, 
particularly using the x86 segment protection mechanisms carefully, system code under
dynamic binary translation could also run at near-native speeds. This is very 
different than the factor-of-fiv e slowdown normally expected of machine simulators.
The difference can be explained by comparing how a dynamic binary translator
converts a simple instruction that accesses memory. To emulate such an instruction
in software, a classic binary translator emulating the full x86 instruction-set 
architecture would have to first verify whether the effective address is within the range
of the data segment, then convert the address into a physical address, and finally to
copy the referenced word into the simulated register. Of course, these various steps
can be optimized through caching, in a way very similar to how the processor
cached page-table mappings in a translation-lookaside buffer. But even such 
optimizations would lead to an expansion of individual instructions into an instruction
sequence.
The VMware binary translator performs none of these steps in software.
Instead, it configures the hardware so that this simple instruction can be reissued
