78
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
1.8.4 The Model of Run Time
Once the operating system binary has been linked, the computer can be
rebooted and the new operating system started. Once running, it may dynamically
load pieces that were not statically included in the binary such as device drivers
and file systems. At run time, the operating system may consist of multiple 
segments, for the text (the program code), the data, and the stack. The text segment is
normally immutable, not changing during execution. The data segment starts out
at a certain size and initialized with certain values, but it can change and grow as
need be. The stack is initially empty but grows and shrinks as functions are called
and returned from. Often the text segment is placed near the bottom of memory,
the data segment just above it, with the ability to grow upward, and the stack 
segment at a high virtual address, with the ability to grow downward, but different
systems work differently.
In all cases, the operating system code is directly executed by the hardware,
with no interpreter and no just-in-time compilation, as is normal with Java.
1.9 RESEARCH ON OPERATING SYSTEMS
Computer science is a rapidly advancing field and it is hard to predict where it
is going. Researchers at universities and industrial research labs are constantly
thinking up new ideas, some of which go nowhere but some of which become the
cornerstone of future products and have massive impact on the industry and users.
Telling which is which turns out to be easier to do in hindsight than in real time.
Separating the wheat from the chaff is especially difficult because it often takes 20
to 30 years from idea to impact.
For example, when President Dwight Eisenhower set up the Dept. of Defense’s
Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) in 1958, he was trying to keep the
Army from killing the Navy and the Air Force over the Pentagon’s research 
budget. He was not trying to invent the Internet. But one of the things ARPA did was
fund some university research on the then-obscure concept of packet switching,
which led to the first experimental packet-switched network, the ARPANET. It
went live in 1969. Before long, other ARPA-funded research networks were 
connected to the ARPANET, and the Internet was born. The Internet was then happily
used by academic researchers for sending email to each other for 20 years. In the
early 1990s, Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web at the CERN research
lab in Geneva and Marc Andreesen wrote a graphical browser for it at the 
University of Illinois. All of a sudden, the Internet was full of twittering teenagers. 
President Eisenhower is probably rolling over in his grave.
Research in operating systems has also led to dramatic changes in practical
systems. As we discussed earlier, the first commercial computer systems were all
batch systems, up until M.I.T. inv ented general-purpose timesharing in the early
