SEC. 9.3
FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS
633
Similarly, P = D(C, KD) where D is the decryption algorithm and KD is the
decryption key. This says that to get the plaintext, P, back from the ciphertext, C,
and the decryption key, KD, one runs the algorithm D with C and KD as 
parameters. The relation between the various pieces is shown in Fig. 9-12.
E
KE
Encryption key
Decryption key
P
P
Plaintext in
Plaintext out
Encryption
algorithm
D
KD
Decryption
algorithm
Ciphertext
C = E(P, KE)
P = D(C, KD)
Decryption
Encryption
Figure 9-12. Relationship between the plaintext and the ciphertext.
Secret-Key Cryptography
To make this clearer, consider an encryption algorithm in which each letter is
replaced by a different letter, for example, all As are replaced by Qs, all Bs are
replaced by Ws, all Cs are replaced by Es, and so on like this:
AB CD E  F GH I J K LMNO P QR S  T UVWX Y Z
QW E RT YU I  O PA S D F GH J  K L Z XC VB NM
plaintext:
ciphertext:
This general system is called a monoalphabetic substitution, with the key being
the 26-letter string corresponding to the full alphabet. The encryption key in this
example is QWERTYUIOPASDFGHJKLZXCVBNM. For the key giv en above, the
plaintext ATTA CK would be transformed into the ciphertext QZZQEA.
The
decryption key tells how to get back from the ciphertext to the plaintext. In this
example, the decryption key is KXVMCNOPHQRSZYIJADLEGWBUFT because
an A in the ciphertext is a K in the plaintext, a B in the ciphertext is an X in the
plaintext, etc.
While the encryption is extremely simple to break, it serves a nice illustration
of an important class of cryptographic systems. When it is easy to obtain the
decryption key from the encryption, like in this case, it is called secret-key 
cryptography or symmetric-key cryptography. Although monoalphabetic 
substitution ciphers are completely worthless, other symmetric key algorithms are known
and are relatively secure if the keys are long enough. For serious security, 
minimally 256-bit keys should be used, giving a search space of 2256 5 1. 2 × 1077 keys.
For reference, the number of atoms in the entire observable universe, in all the
