SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
857
something the user is aware of like background music playback. However, soon
after 1.0 shipped, it was observed that applications would often use the API 
incorrectly, setting something to be foreground that was not really so important to the
user. This behavior started to cause bad experiences for users, as the services they
did care about would get killed due to services they did not.
The foreground service issue was addressed in Android 2.0 by requiring that,
in order to make a service foreground, it also needs to have an ongoing notification
associated with it. This tied the purpose of a foreground service (doing something
the user is directly aware of) to something an app would only want to do in such a
situation (inform the user about what it is doing in a very visible way). Playing
music in the background, navigating with maps, tracking exercise—all of these
things naturally involve displaying a notification so the user can easily see what is
happening and control it, even when not in the app that is doing the operation.
Though the notification solution worked well in incentivizing developers to use
foreground services for their intended purpose, over time a more general issue of
apps running in the background became an growing problem for Android that
needed to be further addressed. To understand why, let’s consider the way an 
operating system like Android deals with a limited resource such as battery power.
The battery of a mobile device is an important, limited resource. For each
charge of the battery, you can get a fixed amount of work done. People expect
their battery to last through a normal day without needing to be charged, so there is
a fixed amount of work that a device can do each day. Ideally the battery only
drains while its screen is on and in use, so there is a fairly clear amount of actual
work you can use the device for each day. Howev er, while the screen is off 
numerous things can also consume power, such as:
1. Keeping RAM refreshed so it retains its data.
2. Keeping CPUs asleep but ready to wake up when an external event
happens.
3. Running the various radios: Cell, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, etc.
4. Maintaining an active network connection to wake up when important
ev ents happen, such as receiving an instant message that should notify
the user.
5. Apps doing work users may care about: syncing email (and possibly
notifying of a new message arriving), updating current weather 
information for them to see next time they check their device, syncing
news to show them current headlines next time they look, etc.
The more power consumed while not in use, the more the user’s experience
degrades due to there being less time she can actually use her device qon a single
charge during the day. Most of the above items simply must be done to keep the
