SEC. 7.11
CASE STUDY: VMWARE
523
system optimized specifically to store virtual machine images and
ensure high I/O throughput. This allows for extreme levels of 
performance. For example, VMware demonstrated back in 2011 that a
single ESX Server could issue 1 million disk operations per second
(VMware, 2011).
5. ESX Server made it easy to introduce new capabilities, which
required the tight coordination and specific configuration of multiple
components of a computer. For example, ESX Server introduced
VMotion, the first virtualization solution that could migrate a live 
virtual machine from one machine running ESX Server to another 
machine running ESX Server, while it was running. This achievement
required the coordination of the memory manager, the CPU scheduler,
and the networking stack.
Over the years, new features were added to ESX Server. ESX Server evolved
into ESXi, a small-footprint alternative that is sufficiently small in size to be
preinstalled in the firmware of servers. Today, ESXi is VMware’s most important
product and serves as the foundation of the vSphere suite.
7.12 RESEARCH ON VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
Virtualization technology and cloud computing are both extremely active
research areas. The research produced in these fields is way too much to 
enumerate. Each has multiple research conferences. For instance, the Virtual Execution
Environments (VEE) conference focuses on virtualization in the broadest sense.
You will find papers on migration deduplication, scaling out, and so on. Likewise,
the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SOCC) is one of the best-known
venues on cloud computing. Papers in SOCC include work on fault resilience,
scheduling of data center workloads, management and debugging in clouds.
Hardware support for virtualization is now present in nearly all relevant CPU
architectures, restoring the Popek and Goldberg architectural principles into 
practice. Notably, ARM added a new privilege level ‘‘EL2’’ to support hardware 
virtualization in ARMv8. In mobile platforms, virtualization is often deployed with
another hardware feature called TrustZone to allow a ‘‘secure’’ virtual machine to
co-exist with the main operating environment (Dall et al., 2016).
Security is perpetually a hot topic for research (Dai et al., 2020; Trach et al.,
2020), as is reducing energy usage (Kaffes et al., 2020). With so many data centers
now using virtualization technology, the networks connecting these machines are
also a major subject of research (Alvarez et al., 2020).
One of the nice things about virtualization hardware is that untrusted code can
get direct but safe access to hardware features like page tables, and tagged TLBs.
With this in mind, the Dune project (Belay, 2012) did not aim to provide a machine
abstraction, but rather a process abstraction. The process is able to enter Dune
