936
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
The comparison is also skewed because Win32 is a user-mode wrapper around
the native NT process execution, much as the system library function wraps
fork/exec in UNIX. The actual NT system calls for creating processes and threads,
NtCreateProcess and NtCreateThread, are simpler than the Win32 versions. The
main parameters to NT process creation are a handle on a section representing the
program file to run, a flag specifying whether the new process should, by default,
inherit handles from the creator, and parameters related to the security model. All
the details of setting up the environment strings and creating the initial thread are
left to user-mode code that can use the handle on the new process to manipulate its
virtual address space directly.
To support the POSIX subsystem, native process creation has an option to 
create a new process by copying the virtual address space of another process rather
than mapping a section object for a new program. This is used only to implement
fork for POSIX, and not exposed by Win32. Since POSIX no longer ships with
Windows, process duplication has little use—though sometimes enterprising 
developers come up with special uses, similar to uses of fork without exec in UNIX.
One such interesting usage is process crashdump generation. When a process
crashes and a dump needs to be generated, a clone of the address space is created
using the native NT process creation API, but without handle duplication. This
allows crashdump generation to take its time while the crashing process can be
safely restarted without encountering violations, for example due to files still being
open by its clone.
Thread creation passes the CPU context to use for the new thread (which
includes the stack pointer and initial instruction pointer), a template for the TEB,
and a flag saying whether the thread should be immediately run or created in a 
suspended state (waiting for somebody to call NtResumeThread on its handle). 
Creation of the user-mode stack and pushing of the argv/argc parameters is left to 
usermode code calling the native NT memory-management APIs on the process 
handle.
In the Windows Vista release, a new native API for processes, 
NtCreateUserProcess, was added which moves many of the user-mode steps into the 
kernelmode executive and combines process creation with creation of the initial thread.
The reason for the change was to support the use of processes as security 
boundaries. Normally, all processes created by a user are considered to be equally 
trusted. It is the user, as represented by a token, that determines where the trust 
boundary is. NtCreateUserProcess allows processes to also provide trust boundaries, but
this means that the creating process does not have sufficient rights regarding a new
process handle to implement the details of process creation in user mode for 
processes that are in a different trust environment. The primary use of a process in a
different trust boundary (which are called protected processes) is to support forms
of digital rights management, which protect copyrighted material from being used
improperly. Of course, protected processes only target user-mode attacks against
protected content and cannot prevent kernel-mode attacks.
