470
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
resources that we discussed in this chapter. Suppose two hosts both want to 
perform an RDMA transfer and both have to use buffers on intermediate nodes N1 and
N2. If one of the hosts reserves the last buffer on N1 and the other the last buffer on
N2, neither can make progress. By ensuring that the packets from different flows
end up in different buffers, Hu et al. (2017) show that deadlocks are not possible.
Another research direction is to try and detect deadlocks. For instance, Pyla
and Varadarajan (2012) present a deadlock detection system that associates 
memory updates with one or more locks guarding the updates and does not make the
updates globally visible until all locks that protect the updates are released. All
memory updates in a critical region are then performed atomically. By checking at
the acquisition of the locks, it is possible to detect deadlocks early and start the
recovery procedure . Recovery from a deadlock consists simply of picking one of
the locks and discarding all pending memory updates associated with it. The work
by Cai and Chan (2012) presents a new dynamic deadlock detection scheme that
iteratively prunes lock dependencies that have no incoming or outgoing edges.
Finally, there is a huge amount of theoretical work on distributed deadlock
detection. However, we will not consider it here because (1) it is outside the scope
of this book and (2) none of it is even remotely practical in real systems. Its main
function seems to be keeping otherwise unemployed graph theorists off the streets.
6.9 SUMMARY
Deadlock is a potential problem in any operating system. It occurs when all
the members of a set of processes are blocked waiting for an event that only other
members of the same set can cause. This situation causes all the processes to wait
forever. Commonly the event that the processes are waiting for is the release of
some resource held by another member of the set. Another situation in which
deadlock is possible is when a set of communicating processes are all waiting for a
message and the communication channel is empty and no timeouts are pending.
Resource deadlock can be avoided by keeping track of which states are safe
and which are unsafe. A safe state is one in which there exists a sequence of
ev ents that guarantee that all processes can finish. An unsafe state has no such
guarantee. The banker’s algorithm avoids deadlock by not granting a request if
that request will put the system in an unsafe state.
Resource deadlock can be structurally prevented by building the system in
such a way that it can never occur by design. For example, by allowing a process
to hold only one resource at any instant, the circular wait condition required for
deadlock is broken. Resource deadlock can also be prevented by numbering all the
resources and making processes request them in strictly increasing order.
Resource deadlock is not the only kind of deadlock. Communication deadlock
is also a potential problem in some systems although it can often be handled by
setting appropriate timeouts.
