8
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
who was the daughter of the famed British poet Lord Byron, as the world’s first
programmer. The programming language Ada® is named after her.
1.2.1 The First Generation (1945–1955): Vacuum Tubes
After Babbage’s unsuccessful efforts, little progress was made in constructing
digital computers until the World War II period, which stimulated an explosion of
activity. Professor John Atanasoff and his graduate student Clifford Berry built
what is now reg arded as the first functioning digital computer at Iowa State 
University. It used 300 vacuum tubes. At roughly the same time, Konrad Zuse in Berlin
built the Z3 computer out of electromechanical relays. In 1944, the Colossus was
built and programmed by a group of scientists (including Alan Turing) at Bletchley
Park, England, the Mark I was built by Howard Aiken at Harvard, and the ENIAC
was built by William Mauchley and his graduate student J. Presper Eckert at the
University of Pennsylvania. Some were binary, some used vacuum tubes, some
were programmable, but all were very primitive and took seconds to perform even
the simplest calculation.
In these early days, a single group of people (usually engineers) designed,
built, programmed, operated, and maintained each machine. All programming was
done in absolute machine language, or even worse yet, by wiring up electrical 
circuits by connecting thousands of cables to plugboards to control the machine’s
basic functions. Programming languages were unknown (even assembly language
was unknown). Operating systems were unheard of. The usual mode of operation
was for the programmer to sign up for a block of time using the signup sheet on the
wall, then come down to the machine room, insert his or her plugboard into the
computer, and spend the next few hours hoping that none of the 20,000 or so 
vacuum tubes would burn out during the run. Virtually all the problems were simple
straightforward mathematical and numerical calculations, such as grinding out
tables of sines, cosines, and logarithms, or computing artillery trajectories.
By the early 1950s, the routine had improved somewhat with the introduction
of punched cards. It was now possible to write programs on cards and read them in
instead of using plugboards; otherwise, the procedure was the same.
1.2.2 The Second Generation (1955–1965): Transistors and Batch Systems
The introduction of the transistor in the mid-1950s changed the picture 
radically. Computers became reliable enough that they could be manufactured and sold
to paying customers with the expectation that they would continue to function long
enough to get useful work done. For the first time, there was a clear separation
between designers, builders, operators, programmers, and maintenance personnel.
These machines, which are now called mainframes, were locked away in
large, specially air-conditioned computer rooms, with staffs of professional 
operators to run them. Only large corporations or government agencies or universities
