SEC. 11.7
INPUT/OUTPUT IN WINDOWS
989
correctly in this environment can be very challenging, which is why WDF was
developed to simplify the Windows Driver Model.
Many books are available about the Windows Driver Model and the newer
Windows Driver Foundation (Orwick and Smith, 2007; Viscarola et al., 2007;
Kanetkar, 2008; Vostokov, 2009; Reeves, 2010; and Yosifovich, 2019).
11.8 THE WINDOWS NT FILE SYSTEM
Windows supports several file systems, the most important of which are
FAT-16, FAT-32, NTFS (NT File System), and ReFS (Resilient File System).
FAT stands for File Access Table. FAT -16 is the old MS-DOS file system. It uses
16-bit disk addresses, which limits it to disk partitions no larger than 2 GB. It was
primarily used for floppy disks. FAT -32 uses 32-bit disk addresses and supports
disk partitions up to 2 TB. There is no security in FAT -32 and today it is really
used only for transportable media, like flash drives. NTFS is the file system 
developed specifically for the NT version of Windows. Starting with Windows XP it
became the default file system installed by most computer manufacturers, greatly
improving the security and functionality of Windows. NTFS uses 64-bit disk
addresses and can (theoretically) support disk partitions up to 264 bytes, although
other considerations limit it to smaller sizes.
ReFS is the newest file system in this group and initially shipped with 
Windows Server 2012 R2 which coincides with Windows 8.1. It’s called the Resilient
File System because one of its design goals is to be self-healing. ReFS can verify
and automatically repair itself without downtime. This is achieved by maintaining
integrity metadata for its on disk structures as well as user data. It’s a 
nonoverwriting file system which means that metadata on disk is never updated in place;
instead the new one is written elsewhere and the old version is marked deleted.
When paired with storage spaces, ReFS supports the concept of tiering of user data
and file system metadata meaning that it can keep ‘‘hot’’ data in faster disks and
move ‘‘cold’’ data to slower disks automatically. Since ReFS is not used as the
default file system for Windows yet, we will not study it in detail.
In this chapter, we will examine the NTFS file system because it is the default
file system for Windows and a modern one with many interesting features and
design innovations. It is large and complex and space limitations prevent us from
covering all of its features, but the material presented below should give a 
reasonable impression of it.
11.8.1 Fundamental Concepts
Individual file names in NTFS are limited to 255 characters; full paths are 
limited to 32,767 characters. File names are in Unicode, allowing people in countries
not using the Latin alphabet (e.g., Greece, Japan, India, Russia, and Israel) to write
