924
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
defined by the I/O manager). The device object is a leaf node in the
part of the NT namespace that the object manager manages.
3. The object manager then calls the Parse procedure for this object
type, which happens to be IopParseDevice implemented by the I/O
manager. It passes not only a pointer to the device object it found (for
C:), but also the remaining string \ foo \ bar.
4. The I/O manager will create an IRP (I/O Request Packet), allocate a
file object, and send the request to the stack of I/O devices determined
by the device object found by the object manager.
5. The IRP is passed down the I/O stack until it reaches a device object
representing the file-system instance for C:. At each stage, control is
passed to an entry point into the driver object associated with the 
device object at that level. The entry point used here is for CREATE
operations, since the request is to create or open a file named
\ foo \ bar on the volume.
6. The device objects encountered as the IRP heads toward the file 
system represent file-system filter drivers, which may modify the I/O
operation before it reaches the file-system device object. Typically
these intermediate devices represent system extensions like antivirus
filters.
7. The file-system device object has a link to the file-system driver
object, say NTFS. So, the driver object contains the address of the
CREATE operation within NTFS.
8. NTFS will fill in the file object and return it to the I/O manager,
which returns back up through all the devices on the stack until 
IopParseDevice returns to the object manager (see Sec. 11.8).
9. The object manager is finished with its namespace lookup. It received
back an initialized object from the Parse routine (which happens to be
a file object—not the original device object it found). So the object
manager creates a handle for the file object in the handle table of the
current process and returns the handle to its caller.
10. The final step is to return back to the user-mode caller, which in this
example is the Win32 API CreateFile, which will return the handle to
the application.
Executive components can create new types dynamically, by calling the
ObCreateObjectType interface to the object manager. There is no definitive list of
object types and they change from release to release. Some of the more common
ones in Windows are listed in Fig. 11-21. Let us briefly go over them.
