SEC. 5.4
MASS STORAGE: DISK AND SSD
381
to move the arm as far out as it would go and reset the controller’s internal idea of
the current cylinder to 0. Usually this solved the problem. If it did not, the drive
had to be repaired.
As we have just seen, the controller is really a specialized little computer, 
complete with software, variables, buffers, and occasionally, bugs. Sometimes an
unusual sequence of events, such as an interrupt on one drive occurring 
simultaneously with a recalibrate command for another drive will trigger a bug and cause
the controller to go into a loop or lose track of what it was doing. Controller
designers usually plan for the worst and provide a pin on the chip which, when
asserted, forces the controller to forget whatever it was doing and reset itself. If all
else fails, the disk driver can set a bit to invoke this signal and reset the controller.
If that does not help, all the driver can do is print a message and give up.
Recalibrating a disk makes a funny noise but otherwise normally is not 
disturbing. However, there is one situation where recalibration is a problem: systems with
real-time constraints. When a video is being played off (or served from) a hard
disk, or files from a hard disk are being burned onto a Blu-ray disc, it is essential
that the bits arrive from the hard disk at a uniform rate. Under these circumstances,
recalibrations insert gaps into the bit stream and are unacceptable. Special drives,
called AV disks (Audio Visual disks), which never recalibrate are available for
such applications.
Anecdotally, a highly convincing demonstration of how advanced disk 
controllers have become was given by the Dutch hacker Jeroen Domburg, who hacked
a modern disk controller to make it run custom code. It turns out the disk controller
is equipped with a fairly powerful multicore ARM processor and has easily enough
resources to run Linux. If the bad guys hack your hard drive in this way, they will
be able to see and modify all data you transfer to and from the disk. Even 
reinstalling the operating from scratch will not remove the infection, as the disk 
controller itself is malicious and serves as a permanent backdoor. Alternatively, you
can collect a stack of broken hard drives from your local recycling center and build
your own cluster computer for free.
5.4.2 Solid State Drives (SSDs)
As we saw in Sec. 4.3.7, SSDs are fast, have asymmetric read and write 
performance, and contain no moving parts. They come in different guises. For
instance, there are some that conform to the SATA standard for storage devices that
is also used for magnetic disks. However, since SATA was designed for mechanical
disks that are slow compared to flash technology, more and more SSDs now 
interface to the rest of the system using NVMe (Non-Volatile Memory Express).
NVMe is a standard to exploit better the speed of the fast PCI Express connection
between the SSD and the rest of the system, as well as the parallelism available in
the SSD itself.
