CHAP. 8  
PROBLEMS
603
27. Figure 8-30 lists six different types of service. For each of the following applications,
which service type is most appropriate?
(a) Video on demand over the Internet.
(b) Downloading a Web page.
28.
DNS names have a hierarchical structure, such as sales.general-widget.com or
cs.uni.edu One way to maintain the DNS database would be as one centralized 
database, but that is not done because it would get too many requests/sec. Propose a way
that the DNS database could be maintained in practice.
29. In the discussion of how URLs are processed by a browser, it was stated that 
connections are made to port 80. Why?
30. Migrating virtual machines may be easier than migrating processes, but migration can
still be difficult. What problems can arise when migrating a virtual machine?
31. When a browser fetches a Web page, it first makes a TCP connection to get the text on
the page (in the HTML language). Then it closes the connection and examines the
page. If there are figures or icons, it then makes a separate TCP connection to fetch
each one. Suggest two alternative designs to improve performance here.
32. When session semantics are used, it is always true that changes to a file are 
immediately visible to the process making the change and never visible to processes on other
machines. However, it is an open question as to whether or not they should be
immediately visible to other processes on the same machine. Give an argument each
way.
33. When multiple processes need access to data, in what way is object-based access better
than shared memory?
34. When a Linda in operation is done to locate a tuple, searching the entire tuple space
linearly is very inefficient. Design a way to organize the tuple space that will speed up
searches on all in operations.
35. Imagine that you have two windows open on your computer at once. One of the 
windows is to a list of files in some directory (e.g., File Explorer in Windows or the Finder
in MacOS). The other window is to a shell (command line interpreter). In the shell
you create a new file. In the other window, within a fraction of a second the new file
shows up. Give a way this could be implemented.
36. Copying buffers takes time. Write a C program to find out how much time it takes on a
system to which you have access. Use the clock or times functions to determine how
long it takes to copy a large array. Test with different array sizes to separate copying
time from overhead time.
37. Write C functions that could be used as client and server stubs to make an RPC call to
the standard printf function, and a main program to test the functions. The client and
server should communicate by means of a data structure that could be transmitted over
a network. You may impose reasonable limits on the length of the format string and the
number, types, and sizes of the variables your client stub will accept.
38. Write a program that implements the sender-initiated and receiver-initiated load 
balancing algorithms described in Sec. 8.2. The algorithms should take as input a list of
