700
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
25. Name three characteristics that a good biometric indicator must have in order to be
useful as a login authenticator.
26. Name three biometric characteristics that would not be good to use for authentication.
27. Authentication mechanisms are divided into three categories: Something the user
knows, something the user has, and something the user is. Imagine an authentication
system that uses a combination of these three categories. For example, it first asks the
user to enter a login and password, then insert a plastic card (with magnetic strip) and
enter a PIN, and finally provide fingerprints. Can you think of two drawbacks of this
design?
28. A computer science department has a large collection of UNIX machines on its local
network. Users on any machine can issue a command of the form
rexec machine4 who
and have the command executed on machine4, without having the user log in on the
remote machine. This feature is implemented by having the user’s kernel send the 
command and his UID to the remote machine. Is this scheme secure if the kernels are all
trustworthy? What if some of the machines are students’ personal computers, with no
protection? Assume the network cannot be tapped.
29. Lamport’s one-time password scheme uses the passwords in reverse order. Would it not
be simpler to use f (s) the first time, f (f(s)) the second time, and so on?
30. Is there any feasible way to use the MMU hardware to prevent the kind of overflow
attack shown in Fig. 9-17? Explain why or why not.
31. Describe how stack canaries work and how they can be circumvented by the attackers.
32. The TOCTOU attack exploits a race condition between the attacker and the victim.
One way to prevent race conditions is make file system accesses transactions. Explain
how this approach might work and what problems might arise?
33. Name a C compiler feature that could eliminate a large number of security holes. Why
is it not more widely implemented?
34. Can the Trojan-horse attack work in a system protected by capabilities?
35. When a file is removed, its blocks are generally put back on the free list, but they are
not erased. Do you think it would be a good idea to have the operating system erase
each block before releasing it? Consider both security and performance factors in your
answer, and explain the effect of each.
36. Often one sees the following instructions for recovering from a virus attack:
1. Boot the infected system.
2. Back up all files to an external medium.
3. Run fdisk (or a similar program) to format the disk.
4. Reinstall the operating system from the original CD-ROM.
5. Reload the files from the external medium.
Name two serious errors in these instructions.
