930
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
Threads are the kernel’s abstraction for scheduling the CPU in Windows. 
Priorities are assigned to each thread based on the priority value in the containing
process. Threads can also be affinitized to run only on certain processors. This
helps concurrent programs running on multi-core processors to explicitly spread
out work. Each thread has two separate call stacks, one for execution in user mode
and one for kernel mode. There is also a TEB (Thread Environment Block) that
keeps user-mode data specific to the thread, including per-thread storage called
TLS (Thread Local Storage), and fields for Win32, language and cultural 
localization, and other specialized fields that have been added by various facilities.
Besides the PEBs and TEBs, there is another data structure that kernel mode
shares with each process, namely, user shared data. This is a page that is writable
by the kernel, but read-only in every user-mode process. It contains a number of
values maintained by the kernel, such as various forms of time, version 
information, amount of physical memory, and a large number of shared flags used by
various user-mode components, such as COM, terminal services, and the 
debuggers. The use of this read-only shared page is purely a performance optimization,
as the values could also be obtained by a system call into kernel mode. But system
calls are much more expensive than a single memory access, so for some 
system-maintained fields, such as the time, this makes a lot of sense. The other fields,
such as the current time zone, change infrequently (except on airborne computers),
but code that relies on these fields must query them often just to see if they hav e
changed. As with many performance optimizations, it is a bit ugly, but it works.
Processes
The most fundamental component of a process in Windows is its address
space. If the process is intended for running a program (and most are), process
creation allows a section backed by an executable file on disk to be specified,
which gets mapped into the address space and prepared for execution. When a
process is created, the creating process receives a handle that allows it to modify
the new process by mapping sections, allocating virtual memory, writing 
parameters and environmental data, duplicating file descriptors into its handle table, and
creating threads. This is very different from how processes are created in UNIX
and reflects the difference in the target systems for the original designs of UNIX
vs. Windows.
As described in Sec. 11.1, UNIX was designed for 16-bit single-processor 
systems that used swapping to share memory among processes. In such systems, 
having the process as the unit of concurrency and using an operation like fork to create
processes was a brilliant idea. To run a new process with small memory and no 
virtual memory hardware, processes in memory have to be swapped out to disk to 
create space. UNIX originally implemented fork simply by swapping out the parent
process and handing its physical memory to the child. The operation was almost
free. Programmers love things that are free.
