SEC. 2.2
THREADS
107
specific other thread to terminate. The thread identifier of the thread to wait for is
given as a parameter.
Sometimes it happens that a thread is not logically blocked, but feels that it has
run long enough and wants to give another thread a chance to run. It can 
accomplish this goal by calling pthread yield. There is no such call for processes 
because the assumption there is that processes are fiercely competitive and each
wants all the CPU time it can get (although a very public-spirited process could
call sleep to yield the CPU briefly). However, since the threads of a process are
working together and their code is invariably written by the same programmer,
sometimes the programmer wants them to give each other another chance.
The next two thread calls deal with attributes. Pthread attr init creates the
attribute structure associated with a thread and initializes it to the default values.
These values (such as the priority) can be changed by manipulating fields in the
attribute structure.
Finally, pthread attr destroy removes a thread’s attribute structure, freeing up
its memory. It does not affect threads using it; they continue to exist.
To get a better feel for how Pthreads works, consider the simple example of
Fig. 2-14. Here the main program loops NUMBER OF THREADS times, creating
a new thread on each iteration, after announcing its intention. If the thread creation
fails, it prints an error message and then exits. After creating all the threads, the
main program exits.
When a thread is created, it prints a one-line message announcing itself, then it
exits. The order in which the various messages are interleaved is nondeterminate
and may vary on consecutive runs of the program.
The Pthreads calls described above are not the only ones. We will examine
some of the others after we have discussed process and thread synchronization.
2.2.4 Implementing Threads in User Space
There are two main places to implement threads: user space and the kernel.
The choice is a bit controversial, and a hybrid implementation is also possible. We
will now describe these methods, along with their advantages and disadvantages.
The first method is to put the threads package entirely in user space. The 
kernel knows nothing about them. As far as the kernel is concerned, it is managing
ordinary, single-threaded processes. The first, and most obvious, advantage is that
a user-level threads package can be implemented on an operating system that does
not support threads. All operating systems used to fall into this category, and even
now some still do. With this approach, threads are implemented by a library.
All of these implementations have the same general structure, illustrated in
Fig. 2-15(a). The threads run on top of a run-time system, which is a collection of
procedures that manage threads. We hav e seen four of these already: pthread 
create, pthread exit, pthread join, and pthread yield, but usually there are more.
