530
MULTIPLE PROCESSOR SYSTEMS
CHAP. 8
This chapter has three major sections, corresponding to each of the three 
models of Fig. 8-1. In each model discussed in this chapter, we start out with a brief
introduction to the relevant hardware. Then we move on to the software, especially
the operating system issues for that type of system. As we will see, in each case
different issues are present and different approaches are needed.
8.1 MULTIPROCESSORS
A shared-memory multiprocessor (or just multiprocessor henceforth) is a
computer system in which two or more CPUs share full access to a common RAM.
A program running on any of the CPUs sees a normal (usually paged) virtual
address space. The only unusual property this system has is that the CPU can write
some value into a memory word and then read the word back and get a different
value (because another CPU has changed it). When organized correctly, this 
property forms the basis of interprocessor communication: one CPU writes some data
into memory and another one reads the data out.
For the most part, multiprocessor operating systems are normal operating 
systems. They handle system calls, do memory management, provide a file system,
and manage I/O devices. Nevertheless, there are some areas in which they hav e
unique features. These include process synchronization, resource management,
and scheduling. Below we will first take a brief look at multiprocessor hardware
and then move on to these operating systems’ issues.
8.1.1 Multiprocessor Hardware
Although all multiprocessors have the property that every CPU can address all
of memory, some multiprocessors have the additional property that every memory
word can be read as fast as every other memory word. These machines are called
UMA (Uniform Memory Access) multiprocessors. In contrast, NUMA 
(Nonuniform Memory Access) multiprocessors do not have this property. Why this 
difference exists will become clear later. We will first examine UMA multiprocessors
and then move on to NUMA multiprocessors.
UMA Multiprocessors with Bus-Based Architectures
The simplest multiprocessors are based on a single bus, as illustrated in
Fig. 8-2(a). Tw o or more CPUs and one or more memory modules all use the same
bus for communication. When a CPU wants to read a memory word, it first checks
to see if the bus is busy. If the bus is idle, the CPU puts the address of the word it
wants on the bus, asserts a few control signals, and waits until the memory puts the
desired word on the bus. When the word appears, the CPU reads it in.
