SEC. 1.4
THE OPERATING SYSTEM ZOO
39
We should emphasize that the categories of IoT, embedded, real-time and even
handheld systems overlap considerably. Many of them have at least some soft 
realtime aspects. The embedded and real-time systems run only software put in by the
system designers; users cannot add their own software, which makes protection
easier.
1.4.7 Smart Card Operating Systems
The smallest operating systems run on smart cards, which are credit-card-sized
devices containing a CPU. They hav e very severe processing power and memory
constraints. Some are powered by contacts in the reader into which they are 
inserted, while contactless smart cards are inductively powered (which greatly limits
what they can do.) Some of them can handle only a single function, such as 
electronic payments, but others can handle multiple functions. Often these are 
proprietary systems.
Some smart cards are Java oriented. This means that the ROM on the smart
card holds an interpreter for the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Java applets (small
programs) are downloaded to the card and are interpreted by the JVM interpreter.
Some of these cards can handle multiple Java applets at the same time, leading to
multiprogramming and the need to schedule them. Resource management and 
protection also become an issue when two or more applets are present at the same
time. These issues must be handled by the (usually extremely primitive) operating
system present on the card.
1.5 OPERATING SYSTEM CONCEPTS
Most operating systems provide certain basic concepts and abstractions such as
processes, address spaces, and files that are central to understanding them. In the
following sections, we will look at some of these basic concepts ever so briefly, as
an introduction. We will come back to each of them in great detail later in this
book. To illustrate these concepts we will, from time to time, use examples, 
generally drawn from UNIX. Similar examples typically exist in other systems as well,
however, and we will study some of them later.
1.5.1 Processes
A key concept in all operating systems is the process. A process is basically a
program in execution. Associated with each process is its address space, a list of
memory locations from 0 to some maximum, which the process can read and write.
The address space contains the executable program, the program’s data, and its
stack. Also associated with each process is a set of resources, commonly including
registers (including the program counter and stack pointer), a list of open files,
