636
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
accident). The value of this scheme is that it applies (very slow) public-key 
cryptography only to a relatively small piece of data, the hash. To use this signature
scheme, the receiver must know the sender’s public key. Many users therefore 
publish their public key on their Web page.
9.3.3 Trusted Platform Modules
All cryptography requires keys. If the keys are compromised, all the security
based on them is also compromised. Storing the keys securely is thus essential.
How does one store keys securely on a system that is not secure?
One proposal that the industry has come up with is a chip called the TPM
(Trusted Platform Module), which is a cryptoprocessor with some nonvolatile
storage inside it for keys. The TPM can perform cryptographic operations such as
encrypting blocks of plaintext or decrypting blocks of ciphertext in main memory.
It can also verify digital signatures. When all these operations are done in 
specialized hardware, they become much faster and are likely to be used more widely.
Many computers already have TPM chips and many more are likely to have them
in the future.
TPM is controversial because different parties have different ideas about who
will control the TPM and what it will protect from whom. Microsoft has been a big
advocate of this concept and has developed a series of technologies to use it,
including Palladium, NGSCB, and BitLocker. In its view, the operating system
controls the TPM and uses it for instance to encrypt the disk. However, it also
wants to use the TPM to prevent unauthorized software from being run. 
‘‘Unauthorized software’’ might be pirated (i.e., illegally copied) software or just software
the operating system does not authorize. If the TPM is involved in the booting
process, it might start only operating systems signed by a secret key placed inside
the TPM by the manufacturer and disclosed only to selected operating system 
vendors (e.g., Microsoft). Thus the TPM could be used to limit users’ choices of 
software to those approved by the computer manufacturer (possibly in return for a
large fee).
The music and movie industries are also very keen on TPM as it could be used
to prevent piracy of their content. It could also open up new business models, such
as renting songs or movies for a specific period of time by refusing to decrypt them
after the expiration date.
One interesting use for TPMs is known as remote attestation. It allows an
external party to verify that the computer with the TPM runs the software it should
be running, and not something that cannot be trusted. We will look at remote
attestation later when we introduce secure booting.
TPM has a variety of other uses that we do not have space to get into. 
Interestingly enough, the one thing TPM does not do is make computers more secure
against external attacks. What it really focuses on is using cryptography to prevent
users from doing anything not approved directly or indirectly by whoever controls
