CHAP. 8  
PROBLEMS
601
3. Suppose that the wire between switch 2A and switch 3B in the omega network of
Fig. 8-5 breaks. Who is cut off from whom?
4. How is signal handling done in the model of Fig. 8-7?
5. When a system call is made in the model of Fig. 8-8, a problem has to be solved
immediately after the trap that does not occur in the model of Fig. 8-7. What is the
nature of this problem and how might it be solved?
6. Rewrite the enter region code of Fig. 2-22 using the pure read to reduce thrashing
induced by the TSL instruction.
7. Multicore CPUs are common in conventional desktop machines and laptop computers.
Desktops with tens or hundreds of cores are not far off. One possible way to harness
this power is to parallelize standard desktop applications such as the word processor or
the Web browser. Another possible way to harness the power is to parallelize the 
services offered by the operating system, for example, TCP processingas well as 
commonly used library services such as secure http library functions. Which approach
appears the most promising? Why?
8. Are critical regions on code sections really necessary in an SMP operating system to
avoid race conditions or will mutexes on data structures do the job as well?
9. When the TSL instruction is used for multiprocessor synchronization, the cache block
containing the mutex will get shuttled back and forth between the CPU holding the
lock and the CPU requesting it if both of them keep touching the block. To reduce bus
traffic, the requesting CPU executes one TSL ev ery 50 bus cycles, but the CPU holding
the lock always touches the cache block between TSL instructions. If a cache block
consists of 16 32-bit words, each of which requires one bus cycle to transfer, and the
bus runs at 400 MHz, what fraction of the bus bandwidth is eaten up by moving the
cache block back and forth?
10. In the text, it was suggested that a binary exponential backoff algorithm be used
between uses of TSL to poll a lock. It was also suggested to have a maximum delay
between polls. Would the algorithm work correctly if there were no maximum delay?
11. Suppose that the TSL instruction was not available for synchronizing a multiprocessor.
Instead, another instruction, SWP, was provided that atomically swapped the contents
of a register with a word in memory. Could that be used to provide multiprocessor 
synchronization? If so, how could it be used? If not, why does it not work?
12. In this problem you are to compute how much of a bus load a spin lock puts on the bus.
Imagine that each instruction executed by a CPU takes 5 nsec. After an instruction has
completed, any bus cycles needed, for example, for TSL are carried out. Each bus cycle
takes an additional 10 nsec above and beyond the instruction execution time. If a 
process is attempting to enter a critical region using a TSL loop, what fraction of the bus
bandwidth does it consume? Assume that normal caching is working so that fetching
an instruction inside the loop consumes no bus cycles.
13. When gang scheduling is used, does the number of CPUs in the gang have to be a
power of two? Explain your answer.
