SEC. 8.1
MULTIPROCESSORS
557
only a few instructions: to measure the number of clock cycles to jump to the next
code page. In other words, it obtains the value of the CPU cycle counter, jumps to
the virtual address of the next code page, gets the CPU cycle counter again, and
calculates the difference. What good does this do? Well, if it took many CPU
cycles to jump to the next page, it probably means that there was a TLB miss. That
miss was presumably caused by the execution of program code in the victim 
process. Specifically, every slow jump corresponds to a page accessed by the victim.
By observing the sequence of slow pages, the attacker can reconstruct, at least
approximately, the sequence of accesses in the victim and from that derive the key.
In practice, side channel attacks can get much more complicated and generally
have to deal with less ideal circumstances, for example, due to spurious memory
accesses, for instance, by the kernel. However, there are many ways to leak data on
a shared core, and many shared resources besides the TLB to do it. Especially after
the disclosure of the Meltdown and Spectre vulnerabilities in modern processors in
2018 (Xiong and Szefer, 2021), people got very nervous about running mutually
non-trusting programs on the same core.
What does any of this have to do with scheduling, you ask? Since the side
channels are particularly problematic for untrusted code that runs on the same core,
much work has gone into making sure that processes or threads from different
security domains do not run simultaneously on the same core. For instance, the
core scheduler on Windows Hyper-V hypervisor guarantees that it will never
assign threads from more than one virtual machine to the same physical core. If
there is no second from the same virtual machine, it will simply leave the second
hyper-thread unused. In fact, it even allows each virtual machine to indicate which
threads can run together.
The core scheduler makes it harder for attackers to use specific side channels,
but it does not remove all side channels. For instance, in the above example any
attack that occurs inside a single virtual machine is still possible. Even so, SMT is
problematic from a security perspective and some operating systems, such as
OpenBSD, have now disabled it by default—allegedly as a result of the TLB
research by one of the authors of this book. (Sorry!)
8.2 MULTICOMPUTERS
Multiprocessors are popular and attractive because they offer a simple 
communication model: all CPUs share a common memory. Processes can write messages
to memory that can then be read by other processes. Synchronization can be done
using mutexes, semaphores, monitors, and other well-established techniques. The
only fly in the ointment is that large multiprocessors are difficult to build and thus
expensive. And very large ones are impossible to build at any price. So something
else is needed if we are to scale up to large numbers of CPUs.
