CHAP. 1  
PROBLEMS
83
from the disk. If the cache hit rate is 95% and main memory hit rate (after a cache
miss) is 99%, what is the average time to access a word?
16. When a user program makes a system call to read or write a disk file, it provides an
indication of which file it wants, a pointer to the data buffer, and the count. Control is
then transferred to the operating system, which calls the appropriate driver. Suppose
that the driver starts the disk and terminates until an interrupt occurs. In the case of
reading from the disk, obviously the caller will have to be blocked (because there are
no data for it). What about the case of writing to the disk? Need the caller be blocked
aw aiting completion of the disk transfer?
17. What is a trap instruction? Explain its use in operating systems.
18. Why is the process table needed in a timesharing system? Is it also needed in personal
computer systems running UNIX or Windows with a single user?
19. Is there any reason why you might want to mount a file system on a nonempty 
directory? If so, what is it?
20. For each of the following system calls, give a condition that causes it to fail: fork, exec,
and unlink.
21. What type of multiplexing (time, space, or both) can be used for sharing the following
resources: CPU, memory, SSD/disk, network card, printer, keyboard, and display?
22. Can the
count = write(fd, buffer, nbytes);
call return any value in count other than nbytes? If so, why?
23. A file whose file descriptor is fd contains the following sequence of bytes: 2, 7, 1, 8, 2,
8, 1, 8, 2, 8, 4. The following system calls are made:
lseek(fd, 3, SEEK SET);
read(fd, &buffer, 4);
where the lseek call makes a seek to byte 3 of the file. What does buffer contain after
the read has completed?
24. Suppose that a 10-MB file is stored on a disk on the same track (track 50) in 
consecutive sectors. The disk arm is currently situated over track number 100. How long will
it take to retrieve this file from the disk? Assume that it takes about 1 msec to move the
arm from one cylinder to the next and about 5 msec for the sector where the beginning
of the file is stored to rotate under the head. Also, assume that reading occurs at a rate
of 200 MB/s.
25. What is the essential difference between a block special file and a character special
file?
26. In the example given in Fig. 1-17, the library procedure is called read and the system
call itself is called read. Is it essential that both of these have the same name? If not,
which one is more important?
27. Modern operating systems decouple a process address space from the machine’s 
physical memory. List two advantages of this design.
