SEC. 5.6
USER INTERFACES: KEYBOARD, MOUSE, & MONITOR
419
Manipulating a touch screen with just a single finger is still fairly WIMPy—
you just replace the mouse pointer with your stylus or index finger. Multitouch is a
bit more complicated. Touching the screen with fiv e fingers is like pushing fiv e
mouse pointers across the screen at the same time and clearly changes things for
the window manager. Multitouch screens have become ubiquitous and increasingly
sensitive and accurate. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether the Five Point Palm
Exploding Heart Technique has any effect on the CPU.
5.7 THIN CLIENTS
Over the years, the main computing paradigm has oscillated between 
centralized and decentralized computing. The first computers, such as the ENIAC,
were, in fact, personal computers, albeit large ones, because only one person could
use one at once. Then came timesharing systems, in which many remote users at
simple terminals shared a big central computer. Next came the PC era, in which the
users had their own personal computers again.
While the decentralized PC model has advantages, it also has some severe
disadvantages. Probably the biggest problem is that each PC has a large SSD or
hard disk and complex software that must be maintained. For example, when a new
release of the operating system comes out, a great deal of work has to be done to
perform the upgrade on each machine separately. At most corporations, the labor
costs of doing this kind of software maintenance dwarf the actual hardware and
software costs. For home users, the labor is technically free, but few people are
capable of doing it correctly and fewer still enjoy doing it. With a centralized 
system, only one or a few machines have to be updated and those machines have a
staff of experts to do the work.
A related issue is that users should make regular backups of their terabyte file
systems, but few of them do. When disaster strikes, a great deal of moaning and
wringing of hands tends to follow. With a centralized system, backups can be made
ev ery night, to disk or even tape (by automated tape robots).
Another advantage is that resource sharing is easier with centralized systems.
A system with 256 remote users, each with 16 GB of RAM (or 4 TB in total), will
have most of that RAM idle most of the time. With a centralized system with just 1
TB of RAM, it never happens that some user temporarily needs a lot of RAM but
cannot get it because it is on someone else’s PC. The same argument holds for disk
space and other resources.
Finally, we are starting to see a shift from PC-centric computing to 
Web-centric computing. One area where this shift is very far along is email. People used to
get their email delivered to their home machine and read it there. Nowadays, many
people log into Gmail, Hotmail, or Yahoo and read their mail there. In addition,
many people log into other Websites to do word processing, build spreadsheets,
and other things that used to require PC software. It is even possible that eventually
