508
VIRTUALIZATION AND THE CLOUD
CHAP. 7
And so, VMware, Inc. was founded in 1998 with the specific goal of bringing
virtualization to the x86 architecture and the personal computer industry.
VMware’s first product (VMware Workstation) was the first virtualization solution
available for 32-bit x86-based platforms. The product was first released in 1999,
and came in two variants: VMware Workstation for Linux, a type 2 hypervisor
that ran on top of Linux host operating systems, and VMware Workstation for
Windows, which similarly ran on top of Windows NT. Both variants had identical
functionality: users could create multiple virtual machines by specifying first the
characteristics of the virtual hardware (such as how much memory to give the 
virtual machine, or the size of the virtual disk) and could then install the operating
system of their choice within the virtual machine, typically from the (virtual) 
CDROM.
VMware Workstation was largely aimed at developers and IT professionals.
Before the introduction of virtualization, a developer routinely had two computers
on his desk, a stable one for development and a second one where he could 
reinstall the system software as needed. With virtualization, the second test system
became a virtual machine.
Soon, VMware started developing a second and more complex product, which
would be released as ESX Server in 2001. ESX Server leveraged the same 
virtualization engine as VMware Workstation, but packaged it as part of a type 1 
hypervisor. In other words, ESX Server ran directly on the hardware without requiring a
host operating system. The ESX hypervisor was designed for intense workload
consolidation and contained many optimizations to ensure that all resources (CPU,
memory, and I/O) were efficiently and fairly allocated among the virtual machines.
For example, it was the first to introduce the concept of ballooning to rebalance
memory between virtual machines (Waldspurger, 2002).
ESX Server was aimed at the server consolidation market. Before the 
introduction of virtualization, IT administrators would typically buy, install, and configure
a new server for every new task or application that they had to run in the data 
center. The result was that the infrastructure was very inefficiently utilized: servers at
the time were typically used at 10% of their capacity (during peaks). With ESX
Server, IT administrators could consolidate many independent virtual machines
into a single server, saving time, money, rack space, and electrical power.
In 2002, VMware introduced its first management solution for ESX Server,
originally called Virtual Center, and today called vSphere. It provided a single
point of management for a cluster of servers running virtual machines: an IT
administrator could now simply log into the Virtual Center application and control,
monitor, or provision thousands of virtual machines running throughout the 
enterprise. With Virtual Center came another innovation, VMotion (Nelson et al.,
2005), which allowed the live migration of a running virtual machine over the 
network. For the first time, an IT administrator could move a running computer from
one location to another without having to reboot the operating system, restart
applications, or even lose network connections.
