SEC. 1.2
HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
17
of UNIX, even selling a microcomputer version of it called XENIX during the
company’s early years.)
CP/M, MS-DOS, and other operating systems for early microcomputers were
all based on users typing in commands from the keyboard. That eventually 
changed due to research done by Doug Engelbart at Stanford Research Institute in the
1960s. Engelbart invented the Graphical User Interface, complete with windows,
icons, menus, and mouse. These ideas were adopted by researchers at Xerox PARC
and incorporated into machines they built.
One fine day, Steve Jobs, who co-invented the Apple computer in his garage,
visited PARC, saw a GUI, and instantly realized its potential value, something
Xerox management famously did not. This strategic blunder of incredibly 
gargantuan proportions led to a book entitled Fumbling the Future (Smith and Alexander,
1988). Jobs then embarked on building an Apple with a GUI. This project led to
the Lisa, which was too expensive and failed commercially. Jobs’ second attempt,
the Apple Macintosh, was an huge success, not only because it was much cheaper
than the Lisa, but also because it was user friendly, meaning that it was intended
for users who not only knew nothing about computers but furthermore had 
absolutely no intention whatsoever of learning. In the creative world of graphic design,
professional digital photography, and professional digital video production, 
Macintoshes became widely used and their users loved them. In 1999, Apple adopted a
kernel derived from Carnegie Mellon University’s Mach microkernel which was
originally developed to replace the kernel of BSD UNIX. Thus, Apple’s macOS is
a UNIX-based operating system, albeit with a distinctive interface.
When Microsoft decided to build a successor to MS-DOS, it was strongly
influenced by the success of the Macintosh. It produced a GUI-based system 
called Windows, which originally ran on top of MS-DOS (i.e., it was more like a shell
than a true operating system). For about 10 years, from 1985 to 1995, Windows
was just a graphical environment on top of MS-DOS. However, starting in 1995 a
freestanding version, Windows 95, was released that incorporated many operating
system features into it, using the underlying MS-DOS system only for booting and
running old MS-DOS programs. Microsoft rewrote much of the operating system
from scratch for Windows NT, a full 32-bit system. The lead designer for 
Windows NT was David Cutler, who was also one of the designers of the VAX VMS
operating system, so some ideas from VMS are present in NT. In fact, so many
ideas from VMS were present in it that the owner of VMS, DEC, sued Microsoft.
The case was settled out of court for an amount of money requiring many digits to
express. Version 5 of Windows NT was renamed Windows 2000 in early 1999,
and two years later Microsoft released a slightly upgraded version called Windows
XP which had a longer run than other versions (6 years).
After Windows 2000, Microsoft broke up the Windows family into a client and
a server line. The client line was based on XP and its successors, while the server
line produced Windows Server 2003–2019 and now Windows Server vNext.
Microsoft later also introduced a third line, for the embedded world. All of these
