1084
OPERATING SYSTEM DESIGN
CHAP. 12
x86 machines with an IDE disk as the only disk and x86 machines with a SCSI disk as
the only disk? Would it be a good idea?
14. Indirection is a way of making an algorithm more flexible. Does it have any 
disadvantages, and if so, what are they?
15. Can reentrant procedures have private static global variables? Discuss your answer.
16. The macro of Fig. 12-7(b) is clearly much more efficient than the procedure of
Fig. 12-7(a). One disadvantage, however, is that it is hard to read. Are there any other
disadvantages? If so, what are they?
17. Suppose that we need a way of computing whether the number of bits in a 32-bit word
is odd or even. Devise an algorithm for performing this computation as fast as possible.
You may use up to 256 KB of RAM for tables if need be. Write a macro to carry out
your algorithm. Extra Credit: Write a procedure to do the computation by looping
over the 32 bits. Measure how many times faster your macro is than the procedure.
18. In Fig. 12-8, we saw how GIF files use 8-bit values to index into a color palette. The
same idea can be used with a 16-bit-wide color palette. Under what circumstances, if
any, might a 24-bit color palette be a good idea?
19. One disadvantage of GIF is that the image must include the color palette, which
increases the file size. What is the minimum image size for which an 8-bit-wide color
palette breaks even? Now repeat this question for a 16-bit-wide color palette.
20. In the text we showed how caching path names can result in a significant speedup
when looking up path names. Another technique that is sometimes used is having a
daemon program that opens all the files in the root directory and keeps them open 
permanently, in order to force their i-nodes to be in memory all the time. Does pinning the
i-nodes like this improve the path lookup even more?
21. Even if a remote file has not been removed since a hint was recorded, it may have been
changed since the last time it was referenced. What other information might it be 
useful to record?
22. Consider a system that hoards references to remote files as hints, for example, as
(name, remote-host, remote-name) triples. It is possible that a remote file will quietly
be removed and then replaced. The hint may then retrieve the wrong file. How can this
problem be made less likely to occur?
23. In the text it is stated that locality can often be exploited to improve performance. But
consider a case where a program reads input from one source and continuously outputs
to two or more files. Can an attempt to take advantage of locality in the file system lead
to a decrease in efficiency here? Is there a way around this?
24. Fred Brooks claims that a programmer can write 1000 lines of debugged code per year,
yet the first version of MINIX (13,000 lines of code) was produced by one person in
under three years. How do you explain this discrepancy?
25. Using Brooks’ figure of 1000 lines of code per programmer per year, make an estimate
of the amount of money it took to produce Windows 11. Assume that a programmer
