890
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
The third facility maps views of file mappings into a process’ address space.
Win32 allows only a view to be created for the current process, but the underlying
NT facility is more general, allowing views to be created for any process for which
you have a handle with the appropriate permissions. Separating the creation of a
file mapping from the operation of mapping the file into the address space is a 
different approach than used in the mmap function in UNIX.
In Windows, the file mappings are kernel-mode objects represented by a 
handle. Like most handles, file mappings can be duplicated into other processes. Each
of these processes can map the file mapping into its own address space as it sees
fit. This is useful for sharing memory between processes without having to create
files for sharing. At the NT layer, file mappings (sections) can also be made 
persistent in the NT namespace and accessed by name.
An important area for many programs is file I/O. In the basic Win32 view, a
file is just a linear sequence of bytes. Win32 provides over 70 calls for creating
and destroying files and directories, opening and closing files, reading and writing
them, requesting and setting file attributes, locking ranges of bytes, and many more
fundamental operations on both the organization of the file system and access to
individual files.
There are also various advanced facilities for managing data in files. In 
addition to the primary data stream, files stored on the NTFS file system can have 
additional data streams. Files (and even entire volumes) can be encrypted. Files can be
compressed and/or represented as a sparse stream of bytes where missing regions
of data in the middle occupy no storage on disk. File-system volumes can be
organized out of multiple separate disk partitions using different levels of RAID
storage. Modifications to files or directory subtrees can be detected through a 
notification mechanism or by reading the journal that NTFS maintains for each 
volume.
Each file-system volume is implicitly mounted in the NT namespace, 
according to the name given to the volume, so a file \ foo \ bar might be named, for 
example, \ Device \ HarddiskVolume1 \ foo \ bar. Internal to each NTFS volume, mount
points (called reparse points in Windows) and symbolic links are supported to help
organize the individual volumes.
The low-level I/O model in Windows is fundamentally asynchronous. Once an
I/O operation is begun, the system call can return and allow the thread which 
initiated the I/O to continue in parallel with the I/O operation. Windows supports 
cancellation, as well as a number of different mechanisms for threads to synchronize
with I/O operations when they complete. Windows also allows programs to specify
that I/O should be synchronous when a file is opened, and many library functions,
such as the C library and many Win32 calls, specify synchronous I/O for 
compatibility or to simplify the programming model. In these cases, the executive will
explicitly synchronize with I/O completion before returning to user mode.
Another area for which Win32 provides calls is security. Every thread is 
associated with a kernel-mode object, called a token, which provides information about
