438
DEADLOCKS 
CHAP. 6
Deadlocks can also occur in a variety of other situations. In a database system,
for example, a program may have to lock several records it is using, to avoid race
conditions. If process A locks record R1 and process B locks record R2, and then
each process tries to lock the other one’s record, we also have a deadlock. Thus,
deadlocks can occur on hardware resources or on software resources.
In this chapter, we will look at several kinds of deadlocks, see how they arise,
and study some ways of preventing or avoiding them. Although these deadlocks
arise in the context of operating systems, they also occur in database systems, big
data analytics and many other contexts in computer science, so this material is
actually applicable to a wide variety of concurrent systems.
6.1 RESOURCES
A major class of deadlocks involves resources to which some process has been
granted exclusive access. These resources include devices, data records, files, and
so forth. To make the discussion of deadlocks as general as possible, we will refer
to the objects granted as resources. A resource can be a hardware device (e.g., a
printer) or a piece of information (e.g., a record in a database). A computer will
normally have many different resources that a process can acquire. For some 
resources, several identical instances may be available, such as three printers. When
several copies of a resource are available, any one of them can be used to satisfy
any request for the resource. In short, a resource is anything that must be acquired,
used, and released over the course of time.
6.1.1 Preemptable and Nonpreemptable Resources
Resources come in two types: preemptable and nonpreemptable. A 
preemptable resource is one that can be taken away from the process owning it with no ill
effects. Memory is an example of a preemptable resource. Consider, for example,
a system with 16 GB of user memory, one printer, and two 16-GB processes that
each want to print something. Process A requests and gets the printer, then starts to
compute the values to print. Before it has finished the computation, it exceeds its
time quantum and is swapped out to SSD or disk.
Process B now runs and tries, unsuccessfully as it turns out, to acquire the
printer. Potentially, we now hav e a deadlock situation, because A has the printer
and B has the memory, and neither one can proceed without the resource held by
the other. Fortunately, it is possible to preempt (take away) the memory from B by
swapping it out and swapping A in. Now A can run, do its printing, and then
release the printer. No deadlock occurs.
A nonpreemptable resource, in contrast, is one that cannot be taken away
from its current owner without potentially causing failure. If a process has begun
to scan an object with a 3D scanner, suddenly taking the scanner away from it and
