SEC. 9.3
FORMAL MODELS OF SECURE SYSTEMS
635
communicating parties in a secure manner. Why would anyone ever use it? The
answer is simple. The main problem with public-key cryptography is that it is a
thousand times slower than symmetric cryptography.
Digital Signatures
Frequently it is necessary to sign a document digitally. For example, suppose a
bank customer instructs the bank to buy some stock for him by sending the bank an
email message. An hour after the order has been sent and executed, the stock
crashes. The customer now denies ever having sent the email. The bank can 
produce the email, of course, but the customer can claim the bank forged it in order to
get a commission. How does a judge know who is telling the truth?
Digital signatures make it possible to sign emails and other digital documents
in such a way that they cannot be repudiated by the sender later. One common way
is to first run the document through a one-way cryptographic hash algorithm.
Such a function has the property that given f and its parameter x, computing
y = f (x) is easy to do, but given only f (x), finding x is computationally infeasible.
The hash function typically produces a fixed-length result independent of the 
original document size. Popular hash functions are SHA-256 and SHA-512, which
produce 32-byte and 64-byte results, respectively.
The next step assumes the use of public-key cryptography as described above.
The document owner then applies his private key to the hash to get D(hash). This
value, called the signature block, is appended to the document and sent to the
receiver, as shown in Fig. 9-13.
Original
document
Original
document
Document
compressed
to a hash
value
Hash value
run through D
D(Hash)
D(Hash)
Signature
block
Hash
(a)
(b)
Figure 9-13. (a) Computing a signature block. (b) What the receiver gets.
When the document and hash arrive, the receiver first computes the hash of the
document using SHA-256 or whatever cryptographic hash function has been
agreed upon in advance. The receiver then applies the sender’s public key to the
signature block to get E(D(hash)), getting back the original hash. Note that this
assumes a cryptographic system where E(D(x)) = x. Fortunately, RSA has that
property. If the computed hash does not match the hash from the signature block,
the document, the signature block, or both have been tampered with (or changed by
