176
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
waituntil x < 0 or y + z < n
The signal primitive would no longer be needed. This scheme is clearly more general
than that of Hoare or Brinch Hansen, but it is not used. Why not? (Hint: Think about
the implementation.)
36. A fast-food restaurant has four kinds of employees: (1) order takers, who take 
customers’ orders; (2) cooks, who prepare the food; (3) packaging specialists, who stuff the
food into bags; and (4) cashiers, who give the bags to customers and take their money.
Each employee can be regarded as a communicating sequential process. What form of
interprocess communication do they use? Relate this model to processes in UNIX.
37. Suppose that we have a message-passing system using mailboxes. When sending to a
full mailbox or trying to receive from an empty one, a process does not block. Instead,
it gets an error code back. The process responds to the error code by just trying again,
over and over, until it succeeds. Does this scheme lead to race conditions?
38. The CDC 6600 computers could handle up to 10 I/O processes simultaneously using
an interesting form of round-robin scheduling called processor sharing. A process
switch occurred after each instruction, so instruction 1 came from process 1, 
instruction 2 came from process 2, etc. The process switching was done by special hardware,
and the overhead was zero. If a process needed T sec to complete in the absence of
competition, how much time would it need if processor sharing was used with n 
processes?
39. Consider the following piece of C code:
void main( ) {
fork( );
fork( );
exit( );
}
How many child processes are created upon execution of this program?
40. Round-robin schedulers normally maintain a list of all runnable processes, with each
process occurring exactly once in the list. What would happen (scheduling-wise) if a
process occurred twice in the list? Can you think of any reason for allowing this?
41. Can a measure of whether a process is likely to be CPU bound or I/O bound be 
determined by analyzing source code? How can this be determined at run time?
42. Explain how time quantum value and context switching time affect each other, in a
round-robin scheduling algorithm.
43. Measurements of a certain system have shown that the average process runs for a time
T before blocking on I/O. A process switch requires a time S, which is effectively
wasted (overhead). For round-robin scheduling with quantum Q, giv e a formula for
the CPU efficiency for each of the following:
(a) Q = '
(b) Q > T
(c) S < Q < T
