SEC. 4.4
FILE-SYSTEM MANAGEMENT AND OPTIMIZATION
323
In fact, securely deleting data on disk is not easy. If the disk is old and not
needed any more but the data must not fall into the wrong hands under any 
conditions, the best approach is to get a large flowerpot. Put in some thermite, put the
disk in, and cover it with more thermite. Then light it and watch it burn nicely at
2500°C. Recovery will be impossible, even for a pro. If you are unfamiliar with
the properties of thermite, it is strongly recommended that you do not try this at
home.
However, if you want to reuse the disk, this technique is clearly not 
appropriate. Even if you overwrite the original content with zeros, it may not be enough.
On some hard disks, data stored on the disk leave magnetic traces in areas close to
the actual tracks. So even if the normal content in the tracks is zeroed out, a highly
motivated and sophisticated attacker (such as a government intelligence agency)
could still recover the original content by carefully inspecting the adjacent areas. In
addition, there may be copies of the file in unexpected places on the disk (for 
instance, as a backup or in a cache), and these need to be wiped also. SSDs have
ev en worse problems, as the file system has no control over what flash blocks are
overwritten and when, since this is determined by the FTL. Usually by overwriting
a disk with three to seven passes, alternating zeros and random numbers, will
securely erase it though. There is software available to do this.
One way to make it impossible to recover data from disk, deleted or not, is by
encrypting everything that is on the disk. Full disk encryption is available on all
modern operating systems. As long as you do not write the password on a Post-It
note stuck somewhere on your computer, full disk encryption with a powerful
encryption algorithm will keep your data safe even if the disk falls in the hands of
the baddies.
Full disk encryption is sometimes also provided by the storage devices 
themselves in the form of Self-Encrypting Drives (SEDs) with onboard cryptographic
capabilities to do the encryption and decryption, leading to a performance boost as
the cryptographic calculations are offloaded from the CPU. Unfortunately,
researchers found that many SEDs have critical security weaknesses due to 
specification, design, and implementation issues (Meijer and Van Gastel, 2019).
As an example of full disk encryption, Windows makes use of the capabilities
of such SEDs if they are present. If not, it takes care of the encryption itself, using
a secret key, the volume master key, in a standard encryption algorithm called
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Full disk encryption on Windows was 
designed to be as unobtrusive as possible and many users are blissfully unaware that
their data are encrypted on disk. The volume master key used to encrypt or decrypt
the data on regular (i.e., non SED) storage devices can be obtained by decrypting
the (itself encrypted) key either with the user password or with the recovery key
(that was automatically generated the first time the file system was encrypted), or
by extracting the key from a special-purpose cryptoprocessor known as the Trusted
Platform Module, or TPM. Either way, once it has the key, Windows can encrypt or
decrypt the disk data as required.
