613
Operating system functions that must be part of the TCB include process creation,
process switching, memory management, and part of file and I/O management. In
a secure design, often the TCB will be quite separate from the rest of the operating
system in order to minimize its size and verify its correctness.
An important part of the TCB is the reference monitor, as shown in Fig. 9-2.
The reference monitor accepts all system calls involving security, such as opening
files, and decides whether they should be processed or not. The reference monitor
thus takes care of mediation, allowing all the security decisions to be put in one
place, with no possibility of bypassing it. Most operating systems are not designed
this way, which is part of the reason they are so insecure.
User process
All system calls go through the
 reference monitor for security checking
Reference monitor
Trusted computing base
Operating system kernel
User
space
Kernel
space
Figure 9-2. A reference monitor.
The TCB is closely related to the security principles we discussed earlier. For
instance, a well-designed TCB is simple, separates privileges, applies the principle
of least privilege, and so on. This brings us back to the design of the operating 
system. For some operating system designs, the TCB is enormous. In Windows or
Linux, the TCB consists of all the code running in the kernel. That includes all the
core functionality, but also all drivers. If you want to get picky, it also includes the
compiler, since a rogue compiler could recognize when it is compiling the 
operating system and intentionally insert exploits in it that do not appear in the source
code.
One of the goals of some current security research is to reduce the trusted 
computing base from millions of lines of code to merely tens of thousands of lines of
code. Consider the MINIX 3 operating system: a POSIX-conformant system but
with a radically different structure than Linux or FreeBSD. With MINIX 3, only
about 15,000 lines of code run in the kernel. Everything else runs as a set of user
processes. Some of these, like the file system and the process manager, are part of
the TCB since they can easily compromise system security. But other parts, such as
the printer driver and the audio driver, are not part of the trusted computing base
and no matter what is wrong with them (even if they are taken over by a virus),
SEC. 9.1
FUNDAMENTALS OF OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
