876
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
and-feel to the graphical interface, bolstering Microsoft’s strategy of hooking 
consumers and reaping the benefit as they pressured their employers to adopt systems
with which they were already familiar. The strategy was overwhelmingly 
successful, with Windows XP being installed on hundreds of millions of PCs over its
first few years, allowing Microsoft to achieve its goal of effectively ending the era
of MS-DOS-based Windows.
Microsoft followed up Windows XP by embarking on an ambitious release to
kindle renewed excitement among PC consumers. The result, Windows Vista, was
completed in late 2006, more than fiv e years after Windows XP shipped. Windows
Vista boasted yet another redesign of the graphical interface, and new OS features
under the covers. There were many changes in customer-visible experiences and
capabilities. The technologies under the covers of the system improved 
substantially, with much clean-up of the code and many improvements in performance,
scalability, and reliability. The server version of Vista (Windows Server 2008) was
delivered about a year after the consumer version. It shares, with Vista, the same
core system components, such as the kernel, drivers, and low-level libraries and
programs.
The human story of the early development of NT is related in the book 
Showstopper (Zachary, 1994). The book tells a lot about the key people involved and the
difficulties of undertaking such an ambitious software development project.
11.1.4 Windows Vista
The release of Windows Vista culminated Microsoft’s most extensive operating
system project to date. The initial plans were so ambitious that a couple of years
into its development Vista had to be restarted with a smaller scope. Plans to rely
heavily on Microsoft’s type-safe, garbage-collected .NET language C# were
shelved, as were some significant features such as the WinFS unified storage 
system for searching and organizing data from many different sources. The size of the
full operating system is staggering. The original NT release of 3 million lines of
C/C++ had grown to 16 million in NT 4, 30 million in 2000, and 50 million in XP.
By Windows Vista, the line count had grown to 70 million and has continued to
grow every since.
Much of the size is due to Microsoft’s emphasis on adding many new features
to its products in every release. In the main system32 directory, there are 1600
DLLs (Dynamic Link Libraries) and 400 EXEs (Executables), and that does not
include the other directories containing the myriad of applets included with the
operating system that allow users to surf the Web, play music and video, send
email, scan documents, organize photos, and even make movies. Because 
Microsoft wants customers to switch to new versions, it maintains compatibility by 
generally keeping all the features, APIs, applets (small applications), etc., from the
previous version. Few things ever get deleted. The result is that Windows was
growing dramatically larger from release to release. Windows’ distribution media
