1000
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
The second mechanism is the NTFS change journal. NTFS keeps a list of all
the change records for directories and files on the volume in a special file, which
programs can read using special file-system control operations, that is, the
FSCTL QUERY USN JOURNAL option to the NtFsControlFile API. The journal
file is normally very large, and there is little likelihood that entries will be reused
before they can be examined. However, if journal entries do get reused before an
application can examine them, then the app just needs to enumerate the directory
tree it is interested in, to sync up with its state. After that, it can resume using the
journal.
File Encryption
Computers are used nowadays to store all kinds of sensitive data, including
plans for corporate takeovers, tax information, and love letters, which the owners
do not especially want revealed to anyone. Information loss can happen when a
notebook computer is lost or stolen, a desktop system is rebooted using an 
MSDOS floppy disk to bypass Windows security, or a hard disk is physically removed
from one computer and installed on another one with an insecure operating system.
Windows addresses these problems by providing an option to encrypt files, so
that even in the event the computer is stolen or rebooted using MS-DOS, the files
will be unreadable. The normal way to use Windows encryption is to mark certain
directories as encrypted, which causes all the files in them to be encrypted, and
new files moved to them or created in them to be encrypted as well. The actual
encryption and decryption are not managed by NTFS itself, but by a driver called
EFS (Encryption File System), which registers callbacks with NTFS.
EFS provides encryption for specific files and directories. There is also 
another encryption facility in Windows called BitLocker which runs as a block filter
driver and encrypts almost all the data on a volume, which can help protect data no
matter what—as long as the user takes advantage of the mechanisms available for
strong keys. Given the number of systems that are lost or stolen all the time, and
the great sensitivity to the issue of identity theft, making sure secrets are protected
is very important. An amazing number of notebooks go missing every day. Major
Wall Street companies supposedly average losing one notebook per week in 
taxicabs in New York City alone.
11.9 WINDOWS POWER MANAGEMENT
The power manager supervises power usage throughout the system. 
Historically management of power consumption consisted of shutting off the monitor 
display and stopping the disk drives from spinning. But the issue is rapidly becoming
more complicated due to requirements for extending how long notebooks can run
