132
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
Fig. 2-5. In a system using semaphores, the natural way to hide interrupts is to
have a semaphore, initially set to 0, associated with each I/O device. Just after
starting an I/O device, the managing process does a down on the associated 
semaphore, thus blocking immediately. When the interrupt comes in, the interrupt 
handler then does an up on the associated semaphore, which makes the relevant process
ready to run again. In this model, step 5 in Fig. 2-5 consists of doing an up on the
device’s semaphore, so that in step 6 the scheduler will be able to run the device
manager. Of course, if several processes are now ready, the scheduler may choose
to run an even more important process next. We will look at some of the algorithms
used for scheduling later on in this chapter.
In the example of Fig. 2-28, we have actually used semaphores in two different
ways. This difference is important enough to make explicit. The mutex semaphore
is used for mutual exclusion. It is designed to guarantee that only one process at a
time will be reading or writing the buffer and the associated variables. This mutual
exclusion is required to prevent chaos. We will study mutual exclusion and how to
achieve it in the next section.
The other use of semaphores is for synchronization. The full and empty 
semaphores are needed to guarantee that certain event sequences do or do not occur. In
this case, they ensure that the producer stops running when the buffer is full, and
that the consumer stops running when it is empty. This use is different from mutual
exclusion.
The Readers and Writers Problem
The producers-consumers problem is useful for modeling two processes (or
threads) that exchange blocks of data while sharing a buffer. Another famous 
problem is the readers and writers problem (Courtois et al., 1971), which models access
to a database. Imagine, for example, an airline reservation system, with many 
competing processes wishing to read and write it. It is acceptable to have multiple 
processes reading the database at the same time, but if one process is updating (writing)
the database, no other processes may have access to the database, not even readers.
The question is how do you program the readers and the writers? One solution is
shown in Fig. 2-29.
In this solution, the first reader to get access to the database does a down on the
semaphore db. Subsequent readers merely increment a counter, rc. As readers
leave, they decrement the counter, and the last to leave does an up on the 
semaphore, allowing a blocked writer, if there is one, to get in.
The solution presented here implicitly contains a subtle decision worth noting.
Suppose that while a reader is using the database, another reader comes along.
Since having two readers at the same time is not a problem, the second reader is
admitted. Additional readers can also be admitted if they come along.
Now suppose a writer shows up. The writer may not be admitted to the 
database, since writers must have exclusive access, so the writer must be suspended.
