SEC. 11.1
HISTORY OF WINDOWS THROUGH WINDOWS 11
879
Ultimately, Windows 10 was the most successful release of Windows ever with
over 1.3 billion devices running it, as of fall 2021. Ironically, this success cannot be
attributed to developer enthusiasm over UWP or the popularity of Windows 10
Mobile because neither really happened. Windows 10 Mobile was discontinued in
2017, and while UWP is alive and well, it is not nearly the most popular platform
for developing Windows applications.
Windows 10 provided a familiar user interface and numerous usability 
improvements which worked well on desktop/laptop computers as well as tablets and
‘‘convertible’’ devices. A public beta program called the Windows Insider 
Program was started early in Windows 10 development cycle to regularly share 
preview builds of the operating system with ‘‘Windows Insiders.’’ The program was
very successful with several hundred thousand enthusiasts testing and evaluating
weekly builds. This arrangement allowed Windows developers access to end-user
feedback and telemetry which helped improve the product with every 6-month
release.
Windows 10 leveraged virtual machine technology to significantly improve
security. Biometric and multi-factor authentication simplified the user logon
experience and made it safer. Virtualization-based security helped protect 
sensitive information from even kernel-mode attacks while providing an isolated 
runtime environment for certain applications. Taking advantage of the latest hardware
features from chip manufacturers (including support for the 64-bit ARM 
architecture complete with transparent emulation of x86 applications), Windows 10
improved performance and battery life with new devices while keeping its 
minimum hardware requirements constant and allowed Windows 7 users to upgrade as
official support for the OS ended.
11.1.7 Windows 11
Windows 11 is the most recent version of Windows, publicly made available
on October 5, 2021. It brings numerous usability improvements such as a fresh,
rejuvenated UI, more efficient window management and multitasking capabilities
especially on bigger and multiple monitor configurations. Following the remote
and hybrid work/learning trend, it provides deeper integration with the Teams 
collaboration software as well as Microsoft 365 cloud productivity suite.
While the user interface updates are the most talked-about features of any new
OS, and most relevant to the typical user, the latest Windows has plenty of
advances under the hood. In keeping up with hardware developments, Windows 11
adds various performance, power, and scalability optimizations to take better
advantage of increased number of processor cores, with support up to 2048 logical
processors and more than 64 processors per socket. Perhaps more importantly,
Windows 11 breaks new ground in application compatibility: emulation of x64
applications is now supported on 64-bit ARM devices and it is even possible to run
