702
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
45. Several UNIX systems use the DES algorithm for encrypting passwords. These 
systems typically apply DES 25 times in a row to obtain the encrypted password. 
Download an implementation of DES from the Internet and write a program that encrypts a
password and checks if a password is valid for such a system. Generate a list of 10
encrypted passwords using the Morris-Thomson protection scheme. Use 16-bit salt for
your program.
46. Suppose a system uses ACLs to maintain its protection matrix. Write a set of 
management functions to manage the ACLs when (1) a new object is created; (2) an object
is deleted; (3) a new domain is created; (4) a domain is deleted; (5) new access rights
(a combination of r, w, x) are granted to a domain to access an object; (6) existing
access rights of a domain to access an object are revoked; (7) new access rights are
granted to all domains to access an object; (8) access rights to access an object are
revoked from all domains.
47. Implement the program code outlined in Sec. 9.5.1 to see what happens when there is
buffer overflow. Experiment with different string sizes.
48. In this chapter,, we discussed covert channels. In this exercise, you are to run an 
experiment to determine the bandwidth of one such channel, namely file locking. You are to
write two programs that will try to communicate in a sneaky way, the sender and the
receiver. They are to run on the same computer. The communicate by using a file
called lockfile. Both programs can read and lock lockfile but cannot write it. Sender
transmits a 0 by leaving lockfile unlocked. It sends a 1 by locking it. For simplicity,
assume time is discrete in units of 6t, with one bit transmitted every 6t. The two 
programs are assumed to be synchronized by an external clock. The sender uses lockfile to
transmit a sequence of bytes, each one encoded with a Hamming code for reliability.
The receiver tries to access lockfile at a high rate, with many attempts per 6t. Start with
6t at 10 sec and determine the error rate in the underlying data stream (after the 
Hamming code bits have been used to recover from errors and are stripped off) Then 
gradually reduce 6t by 100 msec each time and plot the error rate and bandwidth as 
functions of 6t.
