712
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
different GUIs (GNOME and KDE), which compete with each other, hav e also
been written for Linux. In short, it has grown to a full-blown UNIX clone with all
the bells and whistles a UNIX lover might conceivably want.
One unusual feature of Linux is its business model: it is free software. It can
be downloaded from various sites on the Internet, for example: www.kernel.org.
Linux comes with a license devised by Richard Stallman, founder of the Free 
Software Foundation. Despite the fact that Linux is free, this license, the GPL (GNU
Public License), is longer than Microsoft’s Windows license and specifies what
you can and cannot do with the code. Users may use, copy, modify, and 
redistribute the source and binary code freely. The main restriction is that all works
derived from the Linux kernel may not be sold or redistributed in binary form only;
the source code must either be shipped with the product or be made available on
request.
Although Torvalds still rides herd on the kernel fairly closely, a large amount
of user-level software has been written by numerous other programmers, many of
them having migrated over from the MINIX, BSD, and GNU online communities.
However, as Linux evolves, an increasingly smaller fraction of the Linux 
community wants to hack source code (witness the hundreds of books telling how to install
and use Linux and only a handful discussing the code or how it works). Also,
many Linux users now forgo the free distribution on the Internet to buy one of the
distributions available from numerous competing commercial companies. A 
popular Website listing the current top-100 Linux distributions is at 
www.distrowatch.org. As more and more software companies start selling their own versions
of Linux and more and more hardware companies offer to preinstall it on the 
computers they ship, the line between commercial software and free software is 
beginning to blur substantially.
As a footnote to the Linux story, it is interesting to note that just as the Linux
bandwagon was gaining steam, it got a big boost from a very unexpected source—
AT&T. In 1992, Berkeley, by now running out of funding, decided to terminate
BSD development with one final release, 4.4BSD (which later formed the basis of
FreeBSD and also MacOS). Since this version contained essentially no AT&T
code, Berkeley issued the software under an open source license (not GPL) that let
ev erybody do whatever they wanted with it except one thing—sue the University
of California. The AT&T subsidiary controlling UNIX promptly reacted by—you
guessed it—suing the University of California. It also sued a company, BSDI, set
up by the BSD developers to package the system and sell support, much as Red
Hat and other companies now do for Linux. Since virtually no AT&T code was
involved, the lawsuit was based on copyright and trademark infringement, 
including items such as BSDI’s 1-800-ITS-UNIX telephone number. Although the case
was eventually settled out of court, it kept FreeBSD off the market long enough for
Linux to get well established. Had the lawsuit not happened, starting around 1993
there would have been serious competition between two free, open source UNIX
systems: the reigning champion, BSD, a mature and stable system with a large
