644
SECURITY 
CHAP. 9
computer. At login time, the server sends a random number, r, to the user’s 
computer, which then computes f (r, k) and sends that back, where f is a publicly
known function. The server then does the computation itself and checks if the
result sent back agrees with the computation. The advantage of this scheme over a
password is that even if a wiretapper sees and records all the traffic in both 
directions, she will learn nothing that helps her next time. Of course, the function, f, has
to be complicated enough that k cannot be deduced, even giv en a large set of 
observations. Cryptographic hash functions are good choices, with the argument being
the XOR of r and k. These functions are known to be hard to reverse.
9.4.2 Authentication Using a Physical Object
The second method for authenticating users is to check for some physical
object they hav e rather than something they know. Metal door keys hav e been used
for centuries for this purpose. Nowadays, the physical object used is often a plastic
card that is inserted into a reader associated with the computer. Normally, the user
must not only insert the card, but must also type in a password, to prevent someone
from using a lost or stolen card. Viewed this way, using a bank’s ATM (Automated
Teller Machine) starts out with the user logging in to the bank’s computer via a
remote terminal (the ATM) using a plastic card and a password (currently a 4-digit
PIN code in most countries, but this is just to avoid the expense of putting a full
QWERTY keyboard on the ATM machine).
Information-bearing plastic cards come in two varieties: magnetic stripe cards
and chip cards. Magnetic stripe cards hold about 140 bytes of information written
on a piece of magnetic tape glued to the back of the card. This information can be
read out by the terminal and then sent to a central computer. Often the information
contains the user’s password (e.g., PIN code) so the terminal can perform an 
identity check even if the link to the main computer is down. Typically the password is
encrypted by a key known only to the bank. These cards cost about $0.10 to $0.50,
depending on whether there is a hologram sticker on the front and the production
volume. As a way to identify users in general, magnetic stripe cards are risky
because the equipment to read and write them is cheap and widespread.
Chip cards contain a tiny integrated circuit (chip) on them. These cards can be
subdivided into two categories: stored value cards and smart cards. Stored value
cards contain a small amount of memory (often only a few KB) using ROM 
technology to allow the value to be remembered when the card is removed from the
reader and thus the power turned off. There is no CPU on the card, so the value
stored must be changed by an external CPU (in the reader). These cards are mass
produced by the millions for well under $1 and are used, for example, as prepaid
telephone cards. When a call is made, the telephone just decrements the value in
the card, but no money actually changes hands. For this reason, these cards are
generally issued by one company for use on only its machines (e.g., telephones or
vending machines). They could be used for login authentication by storing a 1-KB
