1054
OPERATING SYSTEM DESIGN
CHAP. 12
12.3.1 System Structure
Probably the first decision the implementers have to make is what the system
structure should be. We examined the main possibilities in Sec. 1.7, but will
review them here. An unstructured monolithic design is not a good idea, except
maybe for a tiny operating system in, say, a toaster, but even there it is arguable.
Layered Systems
A reasonable approach that has been well established over the years is a 
layered system. Dijkstra’s THE system (Fig. 1-25) was the first layered operating 
system. UNIX and Windows also have a layered structure, but the layering in both of
them is more a way of trying to describe the system than a real guiding principle
that was used in building the system.
For a new system, designers choosing to go this route should first very 
carefully choose the layers and define the functionality of each one. The bottom layer
should always try to hide the worst idiosyncrasies of the hardware, as the 
Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL) does in Windows Probably the next layer should
handle interrupts, context switching, and the MMU, so above this level the code is
mostly machine independent. Above this, different designers will have different
tastes (and biases). One possibility is to have layer 3 manage threads, including
scheduling and interthread synchronization, as shown in Fig. 12-2. The idea here
is that starting at layer 4, we have proper threads that are scheduled normally and
synchronize using a standard mechanism (e.g., mutexes).
Interrupt handling, context switching, MMU
Hide the low-level  hardware
Virtual memory
Threads, thread scheduling, thread synchronization
1
2
3
4
5
Driver 1
Driver n
...
File system 1
...
File system m
6
System call handler
7
Layer
Driver 2
Figure 12-2. One possible design for a modern layered operating system.
In layer 4 we might find the device drivers, each one running as a separate
thread, with its own state, program counter, registers, and so on, possibly (but not
necessarily) within the kernel address space. Such a design can greatly simplify the
I/O structure because when an interrupt occurs, it can be converted into an unlock
on a mutex and a call to the scheduler to (potentially) schedule the newly readied
