SEC. 5.10
SUMMARY
431
Thin clients have some advantages over standard PCs, notably simplicity and
less maintenance for users.
Finally, power management is a major issue for phones, tablets, and notebooks
because battery lifetimes are limited and for desktop and server machines because
of an organization’s energy bills. Various techniques can be employed by the 
operating system to reduce power consumption. Programs can also help out by 
sacrificing some quality for longer battery lifetimes.
PROBLEMS
1. Advances in chip technology have made it possible to put an entire controller, 
including all the bus access logic, on an inexpensive chip. How does that affect the model of
Fig. 1-6?
2. Given the speeds listed in Fig. 5-1, is it possible to record video using a digital video
recorder and transmit them over an 802.11n network at full speed? Defend your
answer.
3. Figure 5-3(b) shows one way of having memory-mapped I/O even in the presence of
separate buses for memory and I/O devices, namely, to first try the memory bus and if
that fails try the I/O bus. A clever computer science student has thought of an
improvement on this idea: try both in parallel, to speed up the process of accessing I/O
devices. What do you think of this idea?
4.
Explain the tradeoffs between precise and imprecise interrupts on a superscalar
machine.
5. A DMA controller has fiv e channels. The controller is capable of requesting a 32-bit
word every 40 nsec. A response takes equally long. How fast does the bus have to be
to avoid being a bottleneck?
6. Suppose that a system uses DMA for data transfer from disk controller to main 
memory. Further assume that it takes t1 nsec on average to acquire the bus and t2 nsec to
transfer one word over the bus (t1 >> t2). After the CPU has programmed the DMA
controller, how long will it take to transfer 1000 words from the disk controller to main
memory, if (a) word-at-a-time mode is used, (b) burst mode is used? Assume that 
commanding the disk controller requires acquiring the bus to send one word and 
acknowledging a transfer also requires acquiring the bus to send one word.
7. One mode that some DMA controllers use is to have the device controller send the
word to the DMA controller, which then issues a second bus request to write to 
memory. How can this mode be used to perform memory to memory copy? Discuss any
advantage or disadvantage of using this method instead of using the CPU to perform
memory to memory copy.
8. Suppose that a computer can read or write a memory word in 5 nsec. Also suppose that
when an interrupt occurs, all 32 CPU registers, plus the program counter and PSW are
pushed onto the stack. What is the maximum number of interrupts per second this
machine can process?
