86
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
eternity. While waiting for a disk request to complete, many more requests may
come in. If there are multiple disks present, some or all of the newer ones may be
fired off to other disks long before the first request is satisfied. Clearly some way is
needed to model and control this concurrency. Processes (and especially threads)
can help here.
Now consider a user PC. When the system is booted, many processes are
secretly started, often unknown to the user. For example, a process may be started
up to wait for incoming email. Another process may run on behalf of the antivirus
program to check periodically if any new virus definitions are available. In 
addition, explicit user processes may be running, printing files and backing up the
user’s photos on a USB stick, all while the user is surfing the Web. All this activity
has to be managed, and a multiprogramming system supporting multiple processes
comes in very handy here. Even simple computing devices, such as smartphones
and tablets, can support multiple processes.
In any multiprogramming system, each CPU switches from process to process
quickly, running each for tens or maybe hundreds of milliseconds. While strictly
speaking, at any one instant each CPU is running only one process, in the course of
1 second it may work on several of them, giving the illusion of parallelism. 
Sometimes people speak of pseudoparallelism in this context, to contrast it with the
true hardware parallelism of multiprocessor systems (which have two or more
CPUs sharing the same physical memory). Keeping track of multiple, parallel
activities is hard for people to do. Therefore, operating system designers over the
years have evolved a conceptual model (sequential processes) that makes 
parallelism easier to deal with. That model, its uses, and some of its consequences form
the subject of this chapter.
2.1.1 The Process Model
In this model, all the runnable software on the computer, sometimes including
the operating system, is organized into a number of sequential processes, or just
processes for short. A process is just an instance of an executing program, 
including the current values of the program counter, registers, and variables. 
Conceptually, each process has its own virtual CPU. In reality, of course, each real
CPU switches back and forth from process to process, but to understand the 
system, it is much easier to think about a collection of processes running in (pseudo)
parallel than to try to keep track of how each CPU switches from program to 
program. Switching rapidly back and forth like this is known as multiprogramming,
as we saw in Chap. 1.
In Fig. 2-1(a), we see a computer multiprogramming four programs in 
memory. In Fig. 2-1(b) we see four processes, each with its own flow of control (i.e., its
own logical program counter), and each one running independently of the other
ones. Of course, there is only one physical program counter, so when each process
runs, its logical program counter is loaded into the real program counter. When it is
