SEC. 10.4
MEMORY MANAGEMENT IN LINUX
745
data are not all that different from program text—both contain bit patterns 
produced by the compiler that must be loaded into memory when the program starts.
The existence of uninitialized data is actually just an optimization. When a 
global variable is not explicitly initialized, the semantics of the C language say that its
initial value is 0. In practice, most global variables are not initialized explicitly,
and are thus 0. This could be implemented by simply having a section of the
executable binary file exactly equal to the number of bytes of data, and initializing
all of them, including the ones that have defaulted to 0.
However, to sav e space in the executable file, this is not done. Instead, the file
contains all the explicitly initialized variables following the program text. The
uninitialized variables are all gathered together after the initialized ones, so all the
compiler has to do is put a word in the header telling how many bytes to allocate.
As an example, consider Fig. 10-12(a) again. Here the program text is 8 KB and
the initialized data is also 8 KB. The uninitialized data (BSS) is 4 KB. The
executable file is only 16 KB (text + initialized data), plus a short header that tells
the system to allocate another 4 KB after the initialized data and zero it before
starting the program. This trick avoids storing 4 KB of zeros in the executable file.
In order to avoid allocating a physical page frame full of zeros, during 
initialization Linux allocates a static zero page, a write-protected page full of zeros.
When a process is loaded, its uninitialized data region is set to point to the zero
page. Whenever a process actually attempts to write in this area, the copy-on-write
mechanism kicks in, and an actual page frame is allocated to the process.
Unlike the text segment, which cannot change, the data segment can change.
Programs modify their variables all the time. Furthermore, many programs need to
allocate space dynamically, during execution. Linux handles this by permitting the
data segment to grow and shrink as memory is allocated and deallocated. A 
system call, br k, is available to allow a program to set the size of its data segment.
Thus to allocate more memory, a program can increase the size of its data segment.
The C library procedure malloc, commonly used to allocate memory, makes heavy
use of it. The process address-space descriptor contains information on the range
of dynamically allocated memory areas in the process, typically called the heap.
The third segment is the stack segment. On most machines, it starts at or near
the top of the virtual address space and grows down toward 0. For instance, on
32bit x86 platforms, the stack starts at address 0xC0000000, which is the 3-GB
virtual address limit visible to the process in user mode. If the stack grows below
the bottom of the stack segment, a hardware fault occurs and the operating system
lowers the bottom of the stack segment by one page. Programs do not explicitly
manage the size of the stack segment.
When a program starts up, its stack is not empty. Instead, it contains all the
environment (shell) variables as well as the command line typed to the shell to
invoke it. In this way, a program can discover its arguments. For example, when
cp src dest
