SEC. 5.8
POWER MANAGEMENT
421
an industry used to a doubling of performance every 18 months (Moore’s law),
having no progress at all seems like a violation of the laws of physics, but that is
the current situation. As a consequence, making computers use less energy so
existing batteries last longer is high on everyone’s agenda. The operating system
plays a major role here, as we will see below.
At the lowest level, hardware vendors are trying to make their electronics more
energy efficient. Techniques used include reducing transistor size, employing
dynamic voltage scaling, using low-swing and adiabatic buses, and similar 
techniques. These are outside the scope of this book.
There are two general approaches to reducing energy consumption. The first
one is for the operating system to turn off parts of the computer (mostly I/O 
devices) when they are not in use because a device that is off uses little or no energy.
The second one is for the application program to use less energy, possibly 
degrading the quality of the user experience, in order to stretch out battery time. We will
look at each of these approaches in turn, but first we will say a little bit about 
hardware design with respect to power usage.
5.8.1 Hardware Issues
Batteries come in two general types: disposable and rechargeable. Disposable
batteries (most commonly AAA, AA, and D cells) can be used to run handheld 
devices, but do not have enough energy to power notebook computers with large
bright screens. A rechargeable battery, in contrast, can store enough energy to
power a notebook for a few hours. Nickel cadmium batteries used to dominate
here, but they gav e way to nickel metal hydride batteries, which last longer and do
not pollute the environment quite as badly when they are eventually discarded.
Lithium ion batteries are even better, and may be recharged without first being
fully drained, but their capacities are also severely limited. Most modern portable
devices use lithium ion batteries. All battery manufacturers understand that the
patent on a notebook battery that lasts 40 hours of heavy use is worth billions of
dollars, but the physics is tough.
The general approach most computer vendors take to battery conservation is to
design the CPU, memory, and I/O devices to have multiple states: on, sleeping,
hibernating, and off. To use the device, it must be on. When the device will not be
needed for a short time, it can be put to sleep, which reduces energy consumption.
It can be awakened quickly by typing a character or moving the mouse. When it is
not expected to be needed for a longer interval, it can be made to hibernate, which
reduces energy consumption even more. The trade-off here is that getting a device
out of hibernation often takes more time and energy than getting it out of sleep
state. Finally, when a device is off, it does nothing and consumes no power. Not all
devices have all these states, but when they do, it is up to the operating system to
manage the state transitions at the right moments.
