372
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
disks now support a system called logical block addressing, in which disk sectors
are just numbered consecutively starting at 0, without regard to the disk geometry.
Disk Formatting
A hard disk consists of a stack of aluminum, alloy, or glass platters typically
3.5 inch in diameter (or 2.5 inch on notebook computers). On each platter is
deposited a thin magnetizable metal oxide. After manufacturing, there is no 
information whatsoever on the disk.
Before the disk can be used, each platter must receive a low-level format done
by software. The format consists of a series of concentric tracks, each containing
some number of sectors, with short gaps between the sectors. The format of a 
sector is shown in Fig. 5-19.
Preamble
Data
ECC
Figure 5-19. A disk sector.
The preamble starts with a certain bit pattern that allows the hardware to 
recognize the start of the sector. It also contains the cylinder and sector numbers and
some other information. The size of the data portion is determined by the 
lowlevel formatting program. Most disks use 512-byte sectors. The ECC field 
contains redundant information that can be used to recover from read errors. The size
and content of this field varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, depending on
how much disk space the designer is willing to give up for higher reliability and
how complex an ECC code the controller can handle. A 16-byte ECC field is not
unusual. Furthermore, all hard disks have some number of spare sectors allocated
to be used to replace sectors with a manufacturing defect.
The position of sector 0 on each track is offset from the previous track when
the low-level format is laid down. This offset, called cylinder skew, is done to
improve performance. The idea is to allow the disk to read multiple tracks in one
continuous operation without losing data. The nature of the problem can be seen
by looking at Fig. 5-18(a). Suppose that a request needs 18 sectors starting at 
sector 0 on the innermost track. Reading the first 16 sectors takes one disk rotation,
but a seek is needed to move outward one track to get the 17th sector. By the time
the head has moved one track, sector 0 has rotated past the head so an entire 
rotation is needed until it comes by again. That problem is eliminated by offsetting the
sectors as shown in Fig. 5-20.
The amount of cylinder skew depends on the drive geometry. For example, a
10,000-RPM (Revolutions Per Minute) drive rotates in 6 msec. If a track contains
300 sectors, a new sector passes under the head every 20 µsec. If the track-to-track
seek time is 800 µsec, 40 sectors will pass by during the seek, so the cylinder skew
