SEC. 9.8
OPERATING SYSTEM HARDENING
693
(a)
(b)
256
224
192
160
128
96
64
32
0
Ref. Mon.
Code 1
Data 1
Code 2
Data 2
Reference
monitor for
checking
system
MOV R1, S1
SHR #24, S1
CMP S1, S2
TRAPNE
J MP (R1)
address
in MB
Virtual
foreign code 1
foreign code 2
Figure 9-36. (a) Memory divided into 16-MB sandboxes. (b) One way of
checking an instruction for validity.
two sandboxes is to prevent a foreign program from modifying its code during
execution to get around these restrictions. By preventing all stores into the code
sandbox, we eliminate the danger of self-modifying code. As long as a foreign 
program is confined this way, it cannot damage the browser or other programs, plant
viruses in memory, or otherwise do any damage to memory.
As soon as a foreign program is loaded, it is relocated to begin at the start of its
sandbox. Then checks are made to see if code and data references are confined to
the appropriate sandbox. In the discussion below, we will just look at code 
references (i.e., JMP and CALL instructions), but the same story holds for data 
references as well. Static JMP instructions that use direct addressing are easy to check:
does the target address land within the boundaries of the code sandbox? Similarly,
relative JMPs are also easy to check. If the foreign program has code that tries to
leave the code sandbox, it is rejected and not executed. Similarly, attempts to touch
data outside the data sandbox cause the foreign program to be rejected. This is the
easy part.
The hard part is dynamic/indirect JMP instructions. As we saw in our 
discussion of CFI, most machines have an instruction in which the address to jump to
is computed at run time, put in a register, and then jumped to indirectly, for 
example by JMP (R1) to jump to the address held in register 1. The validity of such
instructions must be checked at run time. This is done by inserting code directly
before the indirect jump to test the target address. An example of such a test is
shown in Fig. 9-36(b). Remember that all valid addresses have the same upper k
bits, so this prefix can be stored in a scratch register, say S2. Such a register
