SEC. 2.5
SCHEDULING
163
bad if some of the requests near the end of the queue required only a few 
milliseconds of CPU time. With a short quantum, they would have gotten better service.
Another factor is that if the quantum is set longer than the mean CPU burst,
preemption will not happen very often. Instead, most processes will perform a
blocking operation before the quantum runs out, causing a process switch. 
Eliminating preemption improves performance because process switches then happen
only when they are logically necessary, that is, when a process blocks and cannot
continue.
The conclusion can be formulated as follows: setting the quantum too short
causes too many process switches and lowers the CPU efficiency, but setting it too
long may cause poor response to short interactive requests. A quantum around
20–50 msec is often a reasonable compromise.
Priority Scheduling
Round-robin scheduling makes the implicit assumption that all processes are
equally important. Frequently, the people who own and operate multiuser 
computers have quite different ideas on that subject. At a university, for example, the
pecking order may be the president first, the faculty deans next, then professors,
secretaries, janitors, and finally students. The need to take external factors into 
account leads to priority scheduling. The basic idea is straightforward: each 
process is assigned a priority, and the runnable process with the highest priority is
allowed to run.
Even on a PC with a single owner, there may be multiple processes, some of
them more important than others. For example, a daemon process sending 
electronic mail in the background should be assigned a lower priority than a process
displaying a video film on the screen in real time.
To prevent high-priority processes from running indefinitely, the scheduler
may decrease the priority of the currently running process at each clock tick (i.e.,
at each clock interrupt). If this action causes its priority to drop below that of the
next highest process, a process switch occurs. Alternatively, each process may be
assigned a maximum time quantum that it is allowed to run. When this quantum is
used up, the next-highest-priority process is given a chance to run. After a process
has been punished long enough, its priority needs to be raised by some algorithm,
to let it run again. Otherwise all processes will eventually end up at 0.
Priorities can be assigned to processes statically or dynamically. On a military
computer, processes started by generals might begin at priority 100, processes
started by colonels at 90, majors at 80, captains at 70, lieutenants at 60, and so on
down the totem pole. Alternatively, at a commercial data center, high-priority jobs
might cost $100 an hour, medium priority $75 an hour, and low priority $50 an
hour. The UNIX system has a command, nice, which allows a user to voluntarily
reduce the priority of his process, in order to be nice to the other users. Not 
surprisingly, nobody ever uses it.
