SEC. 5.2
PRINCIPLES OF I/O SOFTWARE
353
the device in any way. In UNIX, all disks can be integrated in the file-system 
hierarchy in arbitrary ways so the user need not be aware of which name corresponds
to which device. For example, a USB stick can be mounted on top of the directory
/usr/ast/backup so that copying a file to /usr/ast/backup/monday copies the file to
the USB stick. In this way, all files and devices are addressed the same way: by a
path name.
Another important issue for I/O software is error handling. In general, errors
should be handled as close to the hardware as possible. If the controller discovers
a read error, it should try to correct the error itself if it can. If it cannot, then the
device driver should handle it, perhaps by just trying to read the block again. Many
errors are transient, such as read errors caused by specks of dust on the read head
of a disk, and will frequently go away if the operation is repeated. Only if the
lower layers are not able to deal with the problem should the upper layers be told
about it. In many cases, error recovery can be done transparently at a low lev el
without the upper levels even knowing about the error.
Still another important issue is that of synchronous (blocking) versus 
asynchronous (interrupt-driven) transfers. Most physical I/O is asynchronous, that is,
the CPU starts the transfer and goes off to do something else until the interrupt
arrives. User programs are much easier to write if the I/O operations are 
blocking—after a read system call the program is automatically suspended until the data
are available in the buffer. It is up to the operating system to make operations that
are actually interrupt-driven look blocking to the user programs. However, some
very high-performance applications need to control all the details of the I/O, so
operating systems also make asynchronous I/O available to them.
Another issue for the I/O software is buffering. Often data that come off a 
device cannot be stored directly in their final destination. For example, when a packet
comes in off the network, the operating system does not know where to put it until
it has stored the packet somewhere and examined it to see which port it is 
addressed to. Also, some devices have sev ere real-time constraints (for example, digital
audio devices), so the data must be put into an output buffer in advance to decouple
the rate at which the buffer is filled from the rate at which it is emptied, in order to
avoid buffer underruns. Buffering involves considerable copying and often has a
major impact on I/O performance.
The final concept that we will mention here is sharable versus dedicated 
devices. Some I/O devices, such as disks and SSDs, can be used by many users at the
same time. No problems are caused by multiple users having open files on the
same storage devices at the same time. Other devices, such as printers, have to be
dedicated to a single user until that user is finished. Then another user can have the
printer. Having two or more users writing characters intermixed at random to the
same page will definitely not work. Scanners are like that as well. Introducing
dedicated (unshared) devices also introduces a variety of problems, such as 
deadlocks. Again, the operating system must be able to handle both shared and 
dedicated devices in a way that avoids problems.
