SEC. 10.3
PROCESSES IN LINUX
731
reason, information about signals must be in memory all the time, even when the
process is not present in memory. On the other hand, information about file
descriptors can be kept in the user structure and brought in only when the process
is in memory and runnable.
The information in the process descriptor falls into a number of broad 
categories that can be roughly described as follows:
1. Scheduling parameters. Process priority, amount of CPU time 
consumed recently, amount of time spent sleeping recently. Together,
these are used to determine which process to run next.
2. Memory image. Pointers to the text, data, and stack segments, or
page tables. If the text segment is shared, the text pointer points to the
shared text table. When the process is not in memory, information
about how to find its parts on disk is here too.
3. Signals. Masks showing which signals are being ignored, which are
being caught, which are being temporarily blocked, and which are in
the process of being delivered.
4. Machine registers. When a trap to the kernel occurs, the machine
registers (including the floating-point ones, if used) are saved here.
5. System call state. Information about the current system call, 
including the parameters, and results.
6. File descriptor table. When a system call involving a file descriptor
is invoked, the file descriptor is used as an index into this table to
locate the in-core data structure (i-node) corresponding to this file.
7. Accounting. Pointer to a table that keeps track of the user and system
CPU time used by the process. Some systems also maintain limits
here on the amount of CPU time a process may use, the maximum
size of its stack, the number of page frames it may consume, and
other items.
8. Kernel stack. A fixed stack for use by the kernel part of the process.
9. Miscellaneous. Current process state, event being waited for, if any,
time until alarm clock goes off, PID, PID of the parent process, and
user and group identification.
Keeping this information in mind, it is now easy to explain how processes are
created in Linux. The mechanism for creating a new process is actually fairly
straightforward. A new process descriptor and user area are created for the child
process and filled in largely from the parent. The child is given a unique PID not
used by any other process, its memory map is set up, and it is given shared access
to its parent’s files. Then its registers are set up and it is ready to run.
