SEC. 7.9
CLOUDS
503
Clouds can transform the way companies do computing. Overall, consolidating
the computing resources in a small number of places (conveniently located near a
power source and cheap cooling) benefits from economy of scale. Outsourcing
your processing means that you need not worry so much about managing your IT
infrastructure, backups, maintenance, depreciation, scalability, reliability, 
performance, and perhaps security. All of that is done in one place and, assuming the
cloud provider is competent, done well. You would think that IT managers are 
happier today than 10 years ago. However, as these worries disappeared, new ones
emerged. Can you really trust your cloud provider to keep your sensitive data safe?
Will a competitor running on the same infrastructure be able to infer information
you wanted to keep private? What law(s) apply to your data (for instance, if the
cloud provider is from the United States, is your data subject to the PATRIOT Act,
ev en if your company is in Europe)? Once you store all your data in cloud X, will
you be able to get them out again, or will you be tied to that cloud and its provider
forever, something known as vendor lock-in?
7.9.2 Virtual Machine Migration
Virtualization technology not only allows IAAS clouds to run multiple 
different operating systems on the same hardware at the same time, it also permits
clever management. We hav e already discussed the ability to overcommit
resources, especially in combination with deduplication. Now we will look at
another management issue: what if a machine needs servicing (or even 
replacement) while it is running lots of important machines? Probably, clients will not be
happy if their systems go down because the cloud provider wants to replace a disk
drive.
Hypervisors decouple the virtual machine from the physical hardware. In other
words, it does not really matter to the virtual machine if it runs on this machine or
that machine. Thus, the administrator could simply shut down all the virtual 
machines and restart them again on a shiny new machine. Doing so, however, results
in significant downtime. The challenge is to move the virtual machine from the
hardware that needs servicing to the new machine without taking it down at all.
A slightly better approach might be to pause the virtual machine, rather than
shut it down. During the pause, we copy over the memory pages used by the virtual
machine to the new hardware as quickly as possible, configure things correctly in
the new hypervisor and then resume execution. Besides memory, we also need to
transfer storage and network connectivity, but if the machines are close, this can be
relatively fast. We could make the file system network-based to begin with (like
NFS, the network file system), so that it does not matter whether your virtual
machine is running on hardware in server rack 1 or 3. Likewise, the IP address can
simply be switched to the new location. Nevertheless, we still need to pause the
machine for a noticeable amount of time. Less time perhaps, but still noticeable.
