SEC. 8.1
MULTIPROCESSORS
547
attempts to use the lock, the requesting CPU should be able to run out of its cache.
When the CPU owning the lock writes a 0 to it to release it, the cache protocol
automatically invalidates all copies of it in remote caches, requiring the correct
value to be fetched again.
The problem is that caches operate in blocks of 32 or 64 bytes. Usually, the
words surrounding the lock are needed by the CPU holding the lock. Since the TSL
instruction is a write (because it modifies the lock), it needs exclusive access to the
cache block containing the lock. Therefore, every TSL invalidates the block in the
lock holder’s cache and fetches a private, exclusive copy for the requesting CPU.
As soon as the lock holder touches a word adjacent to the lock, the cache block is
moved to its machine. Consequently, the entire cache block containing the lock is
constantly being shuttled between the lock owner and the lock requester, 
generating even more bus traffic than individual reads on the lock word would have.
If we could get rid of all the TSL-induced writes on the requesting side, we
could reduce the cache thrashing appreciably. This goal can be accomplished by
having the requesting CPU first do a pure read to see if the lock is free. Only if the
lock appears to be free does it do a TSL to actually acquire it. The result of this
small change is that most of the polls are now reads instead of writes. If the CPU
holding the lock is only reading the variables in the same cache block, they can
each have a copy of the cache block in shared read-only mode, eliminating all the
cache-block transfers.
When the lock is eventually freed, the owner does a write, which requires 
exclusive access, thus invalidating all copies in remote caches. On the next read by
the requesting CPU, the cache block will be reloaded. Note that if two or more
CPUs are contending for the same lock, it can happen that both see that it is free
simultaneously, and both do a TSL simultaneously to acquire it. Only one of these
will succeed, so there is no race condition here because the real acquisition is done
by the TSL instruction, and it is atomic. Seeing that the lock is free and then trying
to grab it immediately with a TSL does not guarantee that you get it. Someone else
might win, but for the correctness of the algorithm, it does not matter who gets it.
Success on the pure read is merely a hint that this would be a good time to try to
acquire the lock, but it is not a guarantee that the acquisition will succeed.
Another way to reduce bus traffic is to use the well-known Ethernet binary
exponential backoff algorithm (Anderson, 1990). Instead of continuously polling,
as in Fig. 2-25, a delay loop can be inserted between polls. Initially the delay is one
instruction. If the lock is still busy, the delay is doubled to two instructions, then
four instructions, and so on up to some maximum. A low maximum gives a fast
response when the lock is released, but wastes more bus cycles on cache thrashing.
A high maximum reduces cache thrashing at the expense of not noticing that the
lock is free so quickly. Binary exponential backoff can be used with or without the
pure reads preceding the TSL instruction.
An even better idea is to give each CPU wishing to acquire the mutex its own
private lock variable to test, as illustrated in Fig. 8-11 (Mellor-Crummey and Scott,
