xxiv
PREFACE
immediately after the producer-consumer section and moved the 
dining philosophers to another chapter, that of deadlocks, entirely. 
Besides numerous smaller updates, we also dropped some older material,
such as scheduler activations and pop-up threads.
•
Chapter 3 now focuses on modern 64-bit architectures and contains
more precise explanations of many aspects of paging and TLBs. For
instance, we describe how operating systems use paging also and how
some operating systems map the kernel into the address spaces of user
processes.
•
Chapter 4 changed significantly. We dropped the lengthy descriptions
of CD-ROMs and tapes, and instead added sections about SSD-based
file systems, booting in modern UEFI-based computer systems, and
secure file deletion and disk encryption.
•
In Chapter 5, we have more information about SSDs and NVMe, and
explain input devices using a modern USB keyboard instead of the
older PS/2 one of the previous edition. In addition, we clarify the 
relation between interrupts, traps, exceptions, and faults.
•
As mentioned, we added the dining philosophers example to Chapter
6. Other than that, the chapter is pretty much unchanged. The topic of
deadlocks is fairly stable, with few new results.
•
In Chapter 7, we added a section about containers to the existing (and
updated) explanation of hypervisor-based virtualization. The material
on VMware has also been brought up to date.
•
Chapter 8 is an updated version of the previous material on 
multiprocessor systems. We added subsections on simultaneous multithreading
and discuss new types of coprocessors, while dropping sections such
as the one on the older IXP network processors and the one on the
(now dead) CORBA middleware. A new section discusses scheduling
for security.
•
Chapter 9 has been heavily revised and reorganized, with much more
focus on what is relevant for the operating system and less emphasis
on crypto. We now start the chapter with a discussion of principles for
secure design and their relevance for the operating system structure.
We discuss exciting new hardware developments, such as the 
Meltdown and Spectre transient execution vulnerabilities, that have come to
light since the previous edition. In addition, we describe new software
vulnerabilities that are important for the operating system. Finally, we
greatly expanded the description of the ways in which the operating
system can be hardened, with extensive discussion of control flow
integrity, fine-grained ASLR, code signing, access restrictions, and
