SEC. 1.3
COMPUTER HARDWARE REVIEW
21
Monitor
Keyboard
USB printer
Hard!
disk drive
Hard!
disk!
controller
USB!
controller
Keyboard!
controller
Video!
controller
Memory
CPU
Bus
!!MMU
!Figure 1-6. Some of the components of a simple personal computer.
Each CPU has a specific set of instructions that it can execute. Thus an x86
processor cannot execute ARM programs and an ARM processor cannot execute
x86 programs. Please note that we will use the term x86 to refer to all the Intel
processors descended from the 8088, which was used on the original IBM PC.
These include the 286, 386, and Pentium series, as well as the modern Intel core i3,
i5, and i7 CPUs (and their clones).
Because accessing memory to get an instruction or data word takes much 
longer than executing an instruction, all CPUs contain registers inside to hold key 
variables and temporary results. Instruction sets often contains instructions to load a
word from memory into a register, and store a word from a register into memory.
Other instructions combine two operands from registers and/or memory, into a
result, such as adding two words and storing the result in a register or in memory.
In addition to the general registers used to hold variables and temporary
results, most computers have sev eral special registers that are visible to the 
programmer. One of these is the program counter, which contains the memory
address of the next instruction to be fetched. After that instruction has been
fetched, the program counter is updated to point to its successor.
Another register is the stack pointer, which points to the top of the current
stack in memory. The stack contains one frame for each procedure that has been
entered but not yet exited. A procedure’s stack frame holds those input parameters,
local variables, and temporary variables that are not kept in registers.
Yet another register is the PSW (Program Status Word). This register 
contains the condition code bits, which are set by comparison instructions, the CPU
priority, the mode (user or kernel), and various other control bits. User programs
may normally read the entire PSW but typically may write only some of its fields.
The PSW plays an important role in system calls and I/O.
The operating system must be fully aware of all the registers. When time 
multiplexing the CPU, the operating system will often stop the running program to
(re)start another one. Every time it stops a running program, the operating system
must save all the registers so they can be restored when the program runs later.
