72
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
were interpreters for the Pentium, such as Bochs, that ran on the Pentium, but with
a performance loss of one to two orders of magnitude, they were not useful for 
serious work.
This situation changed as a result of several academic research projects in the
1990s and early years of this millennium, notably Disco at Stanford (Bugnion et
al., 1997) and Xen at Cambridge University (Barham et al., 2003). These research
papers led to several commercial products (e.g., VMware Workstation and Xen)
and a revival of interest in virtual machines. Besides VMware and Xen, popular
hypervisors today include KVM (for the Linux kernel), VirtualBox (by Oracle),
and Hyper-V (by Microsoft).
Some of the early research projects improved the performance over interpreters
like Bochs by translating blocks of code on the fly, storing them in an internal
cache, and then reusing them if they were executed again. This improved the 
performance considerably, and led to what we will call machine simulators, as
shown in Fig. 1-29(b). However, although this technique, known as binary 
translation, helped improve matters, the resulting systems, while good enough to 
publish papers about in academic conferences, were still not fast enough to use in
commercial environments where performance matters a lot.
The next step in improving performance was to add a kernel module to do
some of the heavy lifting, as shown in Fig. 1-29(c). In practice now, all 
commercially available hypervisors, such as VMware Workstation, use this hybrid strategy
(and have many other improvements as well). They are called type 2 hypervisors
by everyone, so we will (somewhat grudgingly) go along and use this name in the
rest of this book, even though we would prefer to called them type 1.7 hypervisors
to reflect the fact that they are not entirely user-mode programs. In Chap. 7, we
will describe in detail how VMware Workstation works and what the various
pieces do.
In practice, the real distinction between a type 1 hypervisor and a type 2 
hypervisor is that a type 2 makes uses of a host operating system and its file system to
create processes, store files, and so on. A type 1 hypervisor has no underlying 
support and must perform all these functions itself.
After a type 2 hypervisor is started, it reads the installation image file for the
chosen guest operating system and installs the guest OS on a virtual disk, which
is just a big file in the host operating system’s file system. Type 1 hypervisors 
cannot do this because there is no host operating system to store files on. They must
manage their own storage on a raw disk partition.
When the guest operating system is booted, it does the same thing it does on
the actual hardware, typically starting up some background processes and then a
GUI. To the user, the guest operating system behaves the same way it does when
running on the bare metal even though that is not the case here.
A different approach to handling control instructions is to modify the operating
system to remove them. This approach is not true virtualization. Instead it is
called paravirtualization. We will discuss virtualization in Chap. 7.
