428
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
It can also send commands to drivers instructing them to cut their power levels
(based on the capabilities that it learned earlier, of course). There is also some 
traffic the other way. In particular, when a device such as a keyboard or a mouse
detects activity after a period of idleness, this is a signal to the system to go back to
(near) normal operation.
5.8.3 Application Program Issues
So far we have looked at ways the operating system can reduce energy usage
by various kinds of devices. But there is another approach as well: tell the 
programs to use less energy, even if this means providing a poorer user experience
(better a poorer experience than no experience when the battery dies and the lights
go out). Typically, this information is passed on when the battery charge is below
some threshold. It is then up to the programs to decide between degrading 
performance to lengthen battery life or to maintain performance and risk running out
of energy.
The question is: how can a program degrade its performance to save energy?
The answer is application-specific. For instance, a video player that normally plays
video in full color at 30 frames/sec could save energy by abandoning the color
information and displaying the video in black and white. Another form of 
degradation is to reduce the frame rate, which leads to flicker and gives the movie a jerky
quality. Still another form of degradation is to reduce the number of pixels in both
directions, either by lowering the spatial resolution or making the displayed image
smaller. Measures of this type saved about 30% of the energy.
Another solution is to alternate between local and remote processing. For
instance, we may save power by pushing a computationally expensive operation to
the cloud rather than executing it on, say, a smartphone. Whether this is a good
idea is a tradeoff between the cost of executing things locally versus the energy
cost of operating the radio. Of course, other considerations such as performance
(will the delay go up?), security (do we trust the cloud with our computation?), and
reliability (what if we do not have connectivity?) also play a role.
There are many other things that applications could do. Of course, they 
generally mean that the application must be designed with power management in mind.
Doing do is especially interesting for battery-powered devices, where accepting
some quality degradation means that the user can run longer on a given battery.
5.9 RESEARCH ON INPUT/OUTPUT
Improvement of input/output is an active research domain. Many projects
focus solely on efficiency, but there is also much research on other important
objectives, such as security or power consumption.
