138
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
variables. They can have attributes and there are various calls for managing the
attributes (not shown). The most important operations on condition variables are
pthread cond wait and pthread cond signal. The former blocks the calling
thread until some other thread signals it (using the latter call). The reasons for
blocking and waiting are not part of the waiting and signaling protocol, of course.
The blocking thread often is waiting for the signaling thread to do some work, 
release some resource, or perform some other activity. Only then can the blocking
thread continue. The condition variables allow this waiting and blocking to be done
atomically. The pthread cond broadcast call is used when there are multiple
threads potentially all blocked and waiting for the same signal.
Thread call
Description
pthread cond init 
Create a condition var iable
pthread cond destroy
Destroy a condition var iable
pthread cond wait 
Block waiting for a signal
pthread cond signal 
Signal another thread and wake it up
pthread cond broadcast 
Signal multiple threads and wake all of them
Figure 2-32. Some of the Pthreads calls relating to condition variables.
Condition variables and mutexes are always used together. The pattern is for
one thread to lock a mutex, then wait on a conditional variable when it cannot get
what it needs. Eventually another thread will signal it and it can continue. The
pthread cond wait call atomically unlocks the mutex it is holding. Then, upon
successful return, the mutex shall have been locked again and owned by the calling
thread. For this reason, the mutex is one of the parameters.
It is also worth noting that condition variables (unlike semaphores) have no
memory. If a signal is sent to a condition variable on which no thread is waiting,
the signal is lost. Programmers have to be careful not to lose signals.
As an example of how mutexes and condition variables are used, Fig. 2-33
shows a very simple producer-consumer problem with a single item buffer. When
the producer has filled the buffer, it must wait until the consumer empties it before
producing the next item. Similarly, when the consumer has removed an item, it
must wait until the producer has produced another one. While very simple, this
example illustrates the basic mechanisms. The statement that puts a thread to sleep
should always check the condition to make sure it is satisfied before continuing, as
the thread might have been awakened due to a UNIX signal or some other reason.
2.4.7 Monitors
With semaphores and mutexes interprocess communication looks easy, right?
Forget it. Look closely at the order of the downs before inserting or removing items
from the buffer in Fig. 2-28. Suppose that the two downs in the producer’s code
