SEC. 12.3
IMPLEMENTATION
1055
thread that was blocked on the mutex. MINIX 3 uses this approach, but in UNIX,
Linux, and Windows the interrupt handlers run in a kind of no-man’s land, rather
than as proper threads like other threads that can be scheduled, suspended, and the
like. Since a huge amount of the complexity of any operating system is in the I/O,
any technique for making it more tractable and encapsulated is worth considering.
Above layer 4, we would expect to find virtual memory, one or more file 
systems, and the system-call handlers. These layers are focused on providing services
to applications. If the virtual memory is at a lower level than the file systems, then
the block cache can be paged out, allowing the virtual memory manager to 
dynamically determine how the real memory should be divided among user pages and
kernel pages, including the cache. Windows works this way.
Exokernels
While layering has its supporters among system designers, another camp has
precisely the opposite view (Engler et al., 1995). Their view is based on the 
endto-end argument (Saltzer et al., 1984). This concept says that if something has to
be done by the user program itself, it is wasteful to do it in a lower layer as well.
Consider an application of that principle to remote file access. If a system is
worried about data being corrupted in transit, it should arrange for each file to be
checksummed at the time it is written and the checksum stored along with the file.
When a file is transferred over a network from the source disk to the destination
process, the checksum is transferred, too, and also recomputed at the receiving end.
If the two disagree, the file is discarded and transferred again.
This check is more accurate than using a reliable network protocol since it also
catches disk errors, memory errors, software errors in the routers, and other errors
besides bit transmission errors. The end-to-end argument says that using a reliable
network protocol is then not necessary, since the endpoint (the receiving process)
has enough information to verify the correctness of the file. The only reason for
using a reliable network protocol in this view is for efficiency, that is, catching and
repairing transmission errors earlier.
The end-to-end argument can be extended to almost all of the operating 
system. It argues for not having the operating system do anything that the user 
program can do itself. For example, why hav e a file system? Just let the user read and
write a portion of the raw disk in a protected way. Of course, most users like 
having files, but the end-to-end argument says that the file system should be a library
procedure linked with any program that needs to use files. This approach allows
different programs to have different file systems. This line of reasoning says that
all the operating system should do is securely allocate resources (e.g., the CPU and
the disks) among the competing users. The Exokernel is an operating system built
according to the end-to-end argument (Engler et al., 1995). The Unikernel is the
modern manifestation of the same idea.
