730
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
to signal it after 30 seconds. While the student is reading the text, the program has
nothing to do. It could sit in a tight loop doing nothing, but that would waste CPU
time that a background process or other user might need. A better solution is to
use the pause system call, which tells Linux to suspend the process until the next
signal arrives. Woe be it to the program that calls pause with no alarm pending.
10.3.3 Implementation of Processes and Threads in Linux
A process in Linux is like an iceberg: you only see the part above the water,
but there is also an important part underneath. Every process has a user part that
runs the user program. However, when one of its threads makes a system call, it
traps to kernel mode and begins running in kernel context, with a different memory
map and full access to all machine resources. It is still the same thread, but now
with more power and also its own kernel mode stack and kernel mode program
counter. These are important because a system call can block partway through, for
example, waiting for a disk operation to complete. The program counter and 
registers are then saved so the thread can be restarted in kernel mode later.
The Linux kernel internally represents processes as tasks, via the structure
task struct. Unlike other OS approaches (which make a distinction between a
process, lightweight process, and thread), Linux uses the task structure to represent
any execution context. Therefore, a single-threaded process will be represented
with one task structure and a multithreaded process will have one task structure for
each of the user-level threads. Finally, the kernel itself is multithreaded, and has
kernel-level threads which are not associated with any user process and are 
executing kernel code. We will return to the treatment of multithreaded processes (and
threads in general) later in this section.
For each process, a process descriptor of type task struct is resident in 
memory at all times. It contains vital information needed for the kernel’s management of
all processes, including scheduling parameters, lists of open-file descriptors, and so
on. The process descriptor along with memory for the kernel-mode stack for the
process are created upon process creation.
For compatibility with other UNIX systems, Linux identifies processes via the
PID. The kernel organizes all processes in a doubly linked list of task structures.
In addition to accessing process descriptors by traversing the linked lists, the PID
can be mapped to the address of the task structure, and the process information can
be accessed immediately.
The task structure contains a variety of fields. Some of these fields contain
pointers to other data structures or segments, such as those containing information
about open files. Some of these segments are related to the user-level structure of
the process, which is not of interest when the user process is not runnable. 
Therefore, these may be swapped or paged out, in order not to waste memory on 
information that is not needed. For example, although it is possible for a process to be
sent a signal while it is swapped out, it is not possible for it to read a file. For this
