CHAP. 10
PROBLEMS
867
What problem may a process requesting an exclusive lock suffer from?
38. If a Linux file has protection mode 755 (octal), what can the owner, the owner’s group,
and everyone else do to the file?
39. Some tape drives hav e numbered blocks and the ability to overwrite a particular block
in place without disturbing the blocks in front of or behind it. Could such a device hold
a mounted Linux file system?
40. In Fig. 10-24, both Aron and Nathan have access to the file x in their respective 
directories after linking. Is this access completely symmetrical in the sense that anything
one of them can do with it the other one can, too?
41. As we have seen, absolute path names are looked up starting at the root directory and
relative path names are looked up starting at the working directory. Suggest an efficient
way to implement both kinds of searches.
42. When the file /usr/ast/work/f is opened, several disk accesses are needed to read i-node
and directory blocks. Calculate the number of disk accesses required under the
assumption that the i-node for the root directory is always in memory, and all 
directories are one block long.
43. A Linux i-node has 12 disk addresses for data blocks, as well as the addresses of 
single, double, and triple indirect blocks. If each of these holds 256 disk addresses, what
is the size of the largest file that can be handled, assuming that a disk block is 1 KB?
44. When an i-node is read in from the disk during the process of opening a file, it is put
into an i-node table in memory. This table has some fields that are not present on the
disk. One of them is a counter that keeps track of the number of times the i-node has
been opened. Why is this field needed?
45. On multi-CPU platforms, Linux maintains a runqueue for each CPU. Is this a good
idea? Explain your answer?
46. The concept of loadable modules is useful in that new device drivers may be loaded in
the kernel while the system is running. Provide two disadvantages of this concept.
47. After a system crash and reboot, a recovery program is usually run. Suppose this 
program discovers that the link count in a disk i-node is 2, but only one directory entry
references the i-node. Can it fix the problem, and if so, how?
48. Make an educated guess as to which Linux file system call is the fastest.
49. Is it possible to unlink a file that has never been linked? What happens?
50. Based on the information presented in this chapter, if a Linux ext2 file system were to
be put on a 1.44-MB floppy disk, what is the maximum amount of user file data that
could be stored on the disk? Assume that disk blocks are 1 KB.
51. In view of all the trouble that students can cause if they get to be superuser, why does
this concept exist in the first place?
52. A professor shares files with his students by placing them in a publicly accessible
