280
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
EFI system partition (ESP). Rather than a single magic boot sector, the boot 
process can now use a proper file system containing programs, configuration files, and
anything else that may be useful during boot. Moreover, UEFI expects the
firmware to be able to execute programs in a specific format, called PE (Portable
Executable). In other words, the firmware under UEFI looks like a small operating
system itself with an understanding of disk partitions, file systems, executables,
etc.
Partition 2
...
Partition 2
Start
End
Start
End 
Block 1
Block 2
GPT
Backup GPT
Partition of many blocks
...
Block 0
Space for legacy 
systems that
expect MBR here 
Partition
Table Header
Partition 2
...
Partition 1
Partition 0
Partition n
Block N
Partition
Table Header
Partition 1
Partition 0
Partition n
Figure 4-11. Layout for UEFI with partition table.
4.3.2 Implementing Files
Probably the most important issue in implementing file storage is keeping
track of which disk blocks go with which file. Various methods are used in 
different operating systems. In this section, we will examine a few of them.
Contiguous Allocation
The simplest allocation scheme is to store each file as a contiguous run of disk
blocks. Thus on a disk with 1-KB blocks, a 50-KB file would be allocated 50 
consecutive blocks. With 2-KB blocks, it would be allocated 25 consecutive blocks.
We see an example of contiguous storage allocation in Fig. 4-12(a). Here the
first 40 disk blocks are shown, starting with block 0 on the left. Initially, the disk
was empty. Then a file A, of length four blocks, was written to disk starting at the
beginning (block 0). After that a six-block file, B, was written starting right after
the end of file A.
Note that each file begins at the start of a new block, so that if file A was really
3½ blocks, some space is wasted at the end of the last block. In the figure, a total
of seven files are shown, each one starting at the block following the end of the
previous one. Shading is used just to make it easier to tell the files apart. It has no
actual significance in terms of storage.
Contiguous disk-space allocation has two significant advantages. First, it is
simple to implement because keeping track of where a file’s blocks are is reduced
to remembering two numbers: the disk address of the first block and the number of
blocks in the file. Given the number of the first block, the number of any other
block can be found by a simple addition.
