314
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
list is really a list; with a bitmap it is impossible.) The solution here is also simple:
rebuild the free list.
The worst thing that can happen is that the same data block is present in two or
more files, as shown in Fig. 4-29(d) with block 5. If either of these files is
removed, block 5 will be put on the free list, leading to a situation in which the
same block is both in use and free at the same time. If both files are removed, the
block will be put onto the free list twice.
The appropriate action for the file-system checker to take is to allocate a free
block, copy the contents of block 5 into it, and insert the copy into one of the files.
In this way, the information content of the files is unchanged (although almost
assuredly one is garbled), but the file-system structure is at least made consistent.
The error should be reported, to allow the user to inspect the damage.
In addition to checking to see that each block is properly accounted for, the
file-system checker also checks the directory system. It, too, uses a table of 
counters, but these are per file, rather than per block. It starts at the root directory and
recursively descends the tree, inspecting each directory in the file system. For
ev ery i-node in every directory, it increments a counter for that file’s usage count.
Remember that due to hard links, a file may appear in two or more directories.
Symbolic links do not count and do not cause the counter for the target file to be
incremented.
When the checker is all done, it has a list, indexed by i-node number, telling
how many directories contain each file. It then compares these numbers with the
link counts stored in the i-nodes themselves. These counts start at 1 when a file is
created and are incremented each time a (hard) link is made to the file. In a 
consistent file system, both counts will agree. However, two kinds of errors can occur:
the link count in the i-node can be too high or it can be too low.
If the link count is higher than the number of directory entries, then even if all
the files are removed from the directories, the count will still be nonzero and the 
inode will not be removed. This error is not serious, but it wastes space on the disk
with files that are not in any directory. It should be fixed by setting the link count
in the i-node to the correct value.
The other error is potentially catastrophic. If two directory entries are linked
to a file, but the i-node says that there is only one, when either directory entry is
removed, the i-node count will go to zero. When an i-node count goes to zero, the
file system marks it as unused and releases all of its blocks. This action will result
in one of the directories now pointing to an unused i-node, whose blocks may soon
be assigned to other files. Again, the solution is just to force the link count in the 
inode to the actual number of directory entries.
These two operations, checking blocks and checking directories, are often 
integrated for efficiency reasons (i.e., only one pass over the i-nodes is required).
Other checks are also possible. For example, directories have a definite format,
with i-node numbers and ASCII names. If an i-node number is larger than the
number of i-nodes on the disk, the directory has been damaged.
