38
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
devices contain small computers and most of them run small operating systems. In
addition, we may have even more embedded systems controlling devices that are
not connected to a network at all. Examples include traditional microwave ovens
and washing machines. Such systems do not accept user-installed software, so the
main property which distinguishes such embedded systems from the computers we
discussed earlier is the certainty that no untrusted software will ever run on it. Few
microwave ovens allow you to download and run new applications—all the 
software is in ROM. However, even that is changing. Some high-end cameras have
their own app stores that allow users to install custom apps for in-camera editing,
multiple exposures, different focus algorithms, different image compression 
algorithms, and more.
Nevertheless, for most embedded systems there is no need for protection
between applications, leading to design simplification. Conversely, such operating
systems may provide more support for functionality such as real-time scheduling
or low-power networking which are important in many embedded systems. 
Systems such as Embedded Linux, QNX, and VxWorks are popular in this domain.
For sev erely resource-constrained devices, the operating system should be able to
run in just a few kilobytes. For instance, RIOT, an open source operating system
for IoT devices, can run in less 10 KB and support systems that range from 8-bit
microcontrollers to general-purpose 32-bit CPUs. The TinyOS operating similarly
offers a very small footprint, making it popular in sensor nodes.
1.4.6 Real-Time Operating Systems
Real-time systems are characterized by having time as a key parameter. For
example, in industrial process-control systems, real-time computers have to collect
data about the production process and use it to control machines in the factory.
Often there are hard deadlines that must be met. For example, if a car is moving
down an assembly line, certain actions must take place at certain instants of time.
If, for example, a welding robot welds too early or too late, the car will be ruined.
If the action absolutely must occur at a certain moment (or within a certain range),
we have a hard real-time system. Many of these are found in industrial process
control, avionics, military, and similar application areas. These systems must 
provide absolute guarantees that a certain action will occur by a certain time.
A soft real-time system is one where missing an occasional deadline, while
not desirable, is acceptable and does not cause any permanent damage. Digital
audio or multimedia systems fall in this category. Smartphones are also soft 
realtime systems.
Since meeting deadlines is crucial in (hard) real-time systems, sometimes the
operating system is simply a library linked in with the application programs, with
ev erything tightly coupled and no protection between parts of the system. An
example of this type of real-time system is eCos.
