SEC. 10.8
ANDROID
853
perspective it is foreground for location access, but ‘‘while the app is in use’’ better
explains this to the user.
Android 11 went a step further and introduced a new concept of ‘‘only this
once,’’ shown in Fig. 10-79, now giving the user an option to restrict location
access to only their current session in the app. When selected, once the app is
exited, the location permission will be silently revoked and cause the app to no
longer have location access. The next time the app is used, there will be another
prompt for location access and the user can decide in this new situation what to
allow.
Figure 10-79. Android 11’s ‘‘only this once’’ prompt.
A transient permission grant is useful for permissions like location, where any
time apps have access to it they hav e available a continuous stream of new personal
data about the user, in this case where the user is located. (The same capability was
at this time applied to two other permissions with similar semantics, access to the
camera and microphone.) This addresses the situation where users feels like the
app is asking for access to such data in a situation that makes sense now, but they
do not think the app normally needs that access.
Note also another change to the location experience, where the option to give
background access to location is completely gone. This happened because having
more than three options results in an overly complicated experience for users 
trying to decide what they want, and the vast majority of applications do not need full
background access since most such use cases are served better by foreground 
services.
For the rare cases where an app really could make use of full background 
location access, and the user can be convinced to allow this, the option still remains in
the overall system settings for the app’s permissions, shown in Fig. 10-80. Here
the user can see all of the possible options, including the option currently selected
for the app (if any), and change the selection as desired.
Most recently, Android 12 further extends the options available to the user
about location access by giving them the option to select between coarse vs. fine
