312
FILE SYSTEMS
CHAP. 4
dumping. These are shown in Fig. 4-28(c). Each directory is prefixed by the 
directory’s attributes (owner, times, etc.) so that they can be restored. Finally, in phase
4, the files marked in Fig. 4-28(d) are also dumped, again prefixed by their 
attributes. This completes the dump.
Restoring a file system from the dump disk is straightforward. To start with,
an empty file system is created on the disk. Then the most recent full dump is
restored. Since the directories appear first on the dump disk, they are all restored
first, giving a skeleton of the file system. Then the files themselves are restored.
This process is then repeated with the first incremental dump made after the full
dump, then the next one, and so on.
Although logical dumping is straightforward, there are a few tricky issues. For
one, since the free block list is not a file, it is not dumped and hence it must be 
reconstructed from scratch after all the dumps have been restored. Doing so is
always possible since the set of free blocks is just the complement of the set of
blocks contained in all the files combined.
Another issue is links. If a file is linked to two or more directories, it is 
important that the file is restored only one time and that all the directories that are 
supposed to point to it do so.
Still another issue is the fact that UNIX files may contain holes. It is permitted
to open a file, write a few bytes, then seek to a distant file offset and write a few
more bytes. The blocks in between are not part of the file and should not be
dumped and must not be restored. Core dump files often have a hole of hundreds
of megabytes between the data segment and the stack. If not handled properly,
each restored core file will fill this area with zeros and thus be the same size as the
virtual address space (e.g., 232 bytes, or worse yet, 264 bytes).
Finally, special files, named pipes, and the like (anything that is not a real file)
should never be dumped, no matter in which directory they may occur (they need
not be confined to /dev). For more information about file-system backups, see
Zwicky (1991) and Chervenak et al., (1998).
4.4.3 File-System Consistency
Another area where reliability is an issue is file-system consistency. Many file
systems read blocks, modify them, and write them out later. If the system crashes
before all the modified blocks have been written out, the file system can be left in
an inconsistent state. This problem is especially critical if some of the blocks that
have not been written out are i-node blocks, directory blocks, or blocks containing
the free list.
To deal with inconsistent file systems, most computers have a utility program
that checks file-system consistency. For example, UNIX has fsck; Windows has sfc
(and others). This utility can be run whenever the system is booted, especially
after a crash. The description below tells how fsck works. Sfc is somewhat 
different because it works on a different file system, but the general principle of using
