SEC. 10.1
HISTORY OF UNIX AND LINUX
707
The port to the Interdata initially went slowly at first because the development
work had to be done on the only working UNIX machine, a PDP-11, which was
located on the fifth floor at Bell Labs. The Interdata was on the first floor. 
Generating a new version meant compiling it on the fifth floor and then physically 
carrying a magnetic tape down to the first floor to see if it worked. After several months
of tape carrying, an unknown person said: ‘‘You know, we’re the phone company.
Can’t we run a wire between these two machines?’’ Thus, was UNIX networking
born. After the Interdata port, UNIX was ported to the VAX and later to other 
computers.
After AT&T was broken up in 1984 by the U.S. government, the company was
legally free to set up a computer subsidiary, and did so. Shortly thereafter, AT&T
released its first commercial UNIX product, System III. It was not well received,
so it was replaced by an improved version, System V, a year later. Whatever 
happened to System IV is one of the great unsolved mysteries of computer science.
The original System V has since been replaced by System V, releases 2, 3, and 4,
each one bigger and more complicated than its predecessor. In the process, the 
original idea behind UNIX, of having a simple, elegant system, was gradually 
diminished. Although Ritchie and Thompson’s group later produced an 8th, 9th, and
10th edition of UNIX, these were never widely circulated, as AT&T put all its 
marketing muscle behind System V. Howev er, some of the ideas from the 8th, 9th, and
10th editions were eventually incorporated into System V. AT&T eventually 
decided that it wanted to be a telephone company after all, not a computer company,
and sold its UNIX business to Novell in 1993. Novell subsequently sold it to the
Santa Cruz Operation in 1995. By then it was almost irrelevant who owned it,
since all the major computer companies already had licenses.
10.1.4 Berkeley UNIX
One of the many universities that acquired UNIX Version 6 early on was the
University of California at Berkeley. Because the full source code was available,
Berkeley was able to modify the system substantially. Aided by grants from ARPA,
the U.S. Dept. of Defense’s Advanced Research Projects Agency, Berkeley, 
produced and released an improved version for the PDP-11 called 1BSD (First
Berkeley Software Distribution). This tape was followed quickly by another, 
called 2BSD, also for the PDP-11.
More important were 3BSD and especially its successor, 4BSD for the VAX.
Although AT&T had a VAX version of UNIX, called 32V, it was essentially 
Version 7. In contrast, 4BSD contained a large number of major improvements. 
Foremost among these was the use of virtual memory and paging, allowing programs to
be larger than physical memory by paging parts of them in and out as needed.
Another change allowed file names to be longer than 14 characters. The 
implementation of the file system was also changed, making it considerably faster. 
Signal handling was made more reliable. Networking was introduced, causing the
