SEC. 8.2
MULTICOMPUTERS
569
8.2.4 Remote Procedure Call
Although the message-passing model provides a convenient way to structure a
multicomputer operating system, it suffers from one incurable flaw: the basic 
paradigm around which all communication is built is input/output. The procedures send
and receive are fundamentally engaged in doing I/O, and many people believe that
I/O is the wrong programming model.
This problem has long been known, but little was done about it until a paper by
Birrell and Nelson (1984) introduced a completely different way of attacking the
problem. Although the idea is refreshingly simple (once someone has thought of
it), the implications are often subtle. In this section we will examine the concept,
its implementation, its strengths, and its weaknesses.
In a nutshell, what Birrell and Nelson suggested was allowing programs to call
procedures located on other CPUs. When a process on machine 1 calls a 
procedure on machine 2, the calling process on 1 is suspended, and execution of the 
called procedure takes place on 2. Information can be transported from the called to
the callee in the parameters and can come back in the procedure result. No 
message passing or I/O at all is visible to the programmer. This technique is known as
RPC (Remote Procedure Call) and has become the basis of a large amount of
multicomputer software. Traditionally the calling procedure is known as the client
and the called procedure is known as the server; we will use those names here, too.
The idea behind RPC is to make a remote procedure call look as much as 
possible like a local one. In the simplest form, to call a remote procedure, the client
program must be bound with a small library procedure called the client stub that
represents the server procedure in the client’s address space. Similarly, the server is
bound with a procedure called the server stub. These procedures hide the fact that
the procedure call from the client to the server is not local.
The actual steps in making an RPC are shown in Fig. 8-20. Step 1 is the client
calling the client stub. This call is a local procedure call, with the parameters
pushed onto the stack in the normal way. Step 2 is the client stub packing the
parameters into a message and making a system call to send the message. Packing
the parameters is called marshaling. Step 3 is the kernel sending the message
from the client machine to the server machine. Step 4 is the kernel passing the
incoming packet to the server stub (which would normally have called receive 
earlier). Finally, step 5 is the server stub calling the server procedure. The reply traces
the same path in the other direction.
The key item to note here is that the client procedure, written by the user, just
makes a normal (local) procedure call to the client stub, which has the same name
as the server procedure. Since the client procedure and client stub are in the same
address space, the parameters are passed in the usual way. Similarly, the server
procedure is called by a procedure in its address space with the parameters it
expects. To the server procedure, nothing is odd. In this way, instead of doing I/O
using send and receive, remote communication is done by faking a procedure call.
