362
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
example of the latter situation, scrolling the screen requires just writing a few bytes
into the controller’s registers. No mechanical motion is needed, so the entire 
operation can be completed in nanoseconds.
In the former case, the blocked driver will be awakened by the interrupt. In the
latter case, it will never go to sleep. Either way, after the operation has been 
completed, the driver must check for errors. If everything is all right, the driver may
have some data to pass to the device-independent software (e.g., a block just read).
Finally, it returns some status information for error reporting back to its caller. If
any other requests are queued, one of them can now be selected and started. If
nothing is queued, the driver blocks waiting for the next request.
This simple model is only a rough approximation to reality. Many factors make
the code much more complicated. For one thing, an I/O device may complete
while a driver is running, interrupting the driver. The interrupt may cause a device
driver to run. In fact, it may cause the current driver to run. For example, while the
network driver is processing an incoming packet, another packet may arrive. 
Consequently, drivers have to be reentrant, meaning that a running driver has to
expect that it will be called a second time before the first call has completed.
In a hot-pluggable system, devices can be added or removed while the 
computer is running. As a result, while a driver is busy reading from some device, the
system may inform it that the user has suddenly removed that device from the 
system. Not only must the current I/O transfer be terminated without damaging any
kernel data structures, but any pending requests for the now-vanished device must
also be gracefully removed from the system and their callers given the bad news.
Furthermore, the unexpected addition of new devices may cause the kernel to 
juggle resources (e.g., interrupt request lines), taking old ones away from the driver
and giving it new ones in their place.
Drivers are not allowed to make system calls, but they often need to interact
with the rest of the kernel. Usually, calls to certain kernel procedures are permitted.
For example, there are usually calls to allocate and deallocate hardwired pages of
memory for use as buffers. Other useful calls are needed to manage the MMU,
timers, the DMA controller, the interrupt controller, and so on.
5.3.3 Device-Independent I/O Software
Although some of the I/O software is device specific, other parts of it are 
device independent. The exact boundary between the drivers and the 
device-independent software is system (and device) dependent, because some functions that could
be done in a device-independent way may actually be done in the drivers, for
efficiency or other reasons. The functions shown in Fig. 5-13 are typically done in
the device-independent software.
The basic function of the device-independent software is to perform the I/O
functions that are common to all devices and to provide a uniform interface to the
user-level software. We will now look at the above issues in more detail.
