896
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
The other major components of kernel mode are the device drivers. Windows
uses device drivers for any kernel-mode facilities which are not part of NTOS or
the HAL. This includes file systems, network protocol stacks, and kernel 
extensions like antivirus and DRM (Digital Rights Management) software, as well as
drivers for managing physical devices, interfacing to hardware buses, and so on.
The I/O and virtual memory components cooperate to load (and unload) device
drivers into kernel memory and link them to the NTOS and HAL layers. The I/O
manager provides interfaces which allow devices to be discovered, organized, and
operated—including arranging to load the appropriate device driver. Much of the
configuration information for managing devices and drivers is maintained in the
SYSTEM hive of the registry. The plug-and-play subcomponent of the I/O 
manager maintains information about the hardware detected within the HARDWARE
hive, which is a volatile hive maintained in memory rather than on disk, as it is
completely recreated every time the system boots.
We will now examine the various components of the operating system in a bit
more detail.
The Hypervisor
The Hyper-V hypervisor runs as the lowest software layer underneath 
Windows. Its job is to virtualize the hardware such that multiple guest operating 
systems can run concurrently, each in their own virtual machine, which Windows calls
a partition. The hypervisor achieves this by taking advantage of virtualization 
exCtensions supported by the CPU (VT-X on Intel, AMD-V on AMD and ARMv8-A
on ARM processors) to confine each guest to its assigned memory, CPU, and 
hardware resources, isolated from other guests. Also, the hypervisor intercepts many of
the privileged operations performed by guest operating systems and emulates them
to maintain the illusion. An operating system running on top of the hypervisor
executes threads and handles interrupts on abstractions of the physical processors
called virtual processors. The hypervisor schedules the virtual processors on
physical processors.
Being a Type-1 hypervisor, the Windows hypervisor runs directly on the 
underlying hardware, but uses its virtualization stack components in the root operating
system to provide device support services to its guests. For example, an emulated
disk read request initiated by a guest operating system is handled by the virtual
disk controller component running in user-mode by performing the requested read
operation using regular Win32 APIs. While the root operating system must be
Windows when running Hyper-V, other operating systems, such as Linux, can be
run in the guest partitions. A guest operating system may perform very poorly
unless it has been modified (i.e., paravirtualized) to work with the hypervisor.
For example, if a guest operating system kernel is using a spinlock to 
synchronize between two virtual processors and the hypervisor reschedules the virtual
processor holding the spinlock, the lock hold time may increase by several orders
