912
CASE STUDY 2: WINDOWS 11
CHAP. 11
IDentifier), which, in practice, is a 128-bit number generated to ensure 
uniqueness. The Windows setup program initializes the boot disk in the GPT format and
creates several partitions. The most important are the EFI system partition which
is formatted with FAT32 and contains the Windows Boot Manager UEFI 
application (bootmgrfw.efi) and the boot partition which is formatted with NTFS and
contains the actual Windows installation. In addition, the setup program sets some
well-known UEFI global variables that indicate to the firmware the location of
Windows Boot Manager. These variables are stored in the system’s nonvolatile
memory and persist across boots.
Given a GPT-partitioned disk, the UEFI firmware locates the Windows Boot
Manager in the EFI system partition and transfers control to it. It’s able to do this
because the firmware supports the FAT32 file system (but not the NTFS file 
system). The boot manager’s job is to select the appropriate OS loader application
and execute it. The OS loader’s job is to load the actual operating system files into
memory and start running the OS. Both the boot manager and the OS loader rely
on the UEFI firmware facilities for basic memory management, disk I/O, textual
and graphical console I/O. However, once all the required operating system files
are loaded into memory and prepared for execution, ‘‘ownership’’ of the platform
is transferred to the operating system kernel and these boot services provided by
the firmware are discarded from memory. The kernel then initializes its own 
storage and file system drivers to mount the boot partition and load the rest of the files
necessary to boot Windows.
Boot security is the foundation of OS security. The boot sequence must be 
protected from a special type of malware called rootkits which are sophisticated 
malicious software that inject themselves into the boot sequence, take control of the
hardware, and hide themselves from the security mechanisms that load afterwards
(such as anti-malware applications). As a countermeasure, UEFI supports a feature
called Secure Boot which validates the integrity of every component loaded during
the boot process including the UEFI firmware itself. This verification is performed
by checking the digital signature of each component against a database of trusted
certificates (or certificates issued by trusted certificates), thereby establishing a
chain of trust rooted at the root certificate. As part of Secure Boot, the firmware
validates the Windows Boot Manager before transferring control to it, which, then
validates the OS loader, which, then validates the operating system files 
(hypervisor, secure kernel, kernel, boot drivers, and so on).
Digital signature verification involves calculating a cryptographic hash for the
component to be verified. This hash value is also measured into the TPM (Trusted
Platform Module) which is a secure cryptographic processor required to be 
present by Windows 11. The TPM provides various security services such as 
protection of encryption keys, boot measurements, and attestation. The act of measuring
a hash value into the TPM cryptographically combines the hash value with the
existing value in a PCR (Platform Configuration Register) in an operation called
extending the PCR. The Windows Boot Manager and the OS loader measure not
