SEC. 9.10
SUMMARY
697
Unfortunately, software bugs are no longer our only concern and hardware is
often vulnerable too. Cache side channels and ancient execution issues are some of
the issues on which attackers can build to launch an attack.
To protect itself from compromise, an operating system may take additional
measures. For instance, by restricting the control flow in a program with the help
of control-flow integrity, secure boot processes, randomizing the address space at
fine granularity, restricting trusting only drivers that are signed by a trusted party—
or one of the other ways to harden the operating system.
PROBLEMS
1. Confidentiality, integrity, and availability are three components of security. Describe
an application that requires integrity and availability but not confidentiality, an 
application that requires confidentiality and integrity but not (high) availability, and an 
application that requires confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
2. One of the techniques to build a secure operating system is to minimize the size of the
TCB. Which of the following functions needs to be implemented inside the TCB and
which can be implemented outside TCB: (a) Process context switch; (b) Read a file
from disk; (c) Add more swapping space; (d) Listen to music; (e) Get the GPS 
coordinates of a smartphone.
3. What is a covert channel? What is the basic requirement for a covert channel to exist?
4. In a full access-control matrix, the rows are for domains and the columns are for
objects. What happens if some object is needed in two domains?
5. Suppose that a system has 5000 objects and 100 domains at some time. 1% of the
objects are accessible (some combination of r, w and x) in all domains, 10% are 
accessible in two domains, and the remaining 89% are accessible in only one domain. 
Suppose one unit of space is required to store an access right (some combination of r, w,
x), object ID, or a domain ID. How much space is needed to store the full protection
matrix, protection matrix as ACL, and protection matrix as capability list?
6. Explain which implementation of the protection matrix is more suitable for the 
following operations:
(a) Granting read access to a file for all users.
(b) Revoking write access to a file from all users.
(c) Granting write access to a file to John, Lisa, Christie, and Jeff.
(d) Revoking execute access to a file from Jana, Mike, Molly, and Shane.
7. Tw o different protection mechanisms that we have discussed are capabilities and
access-control lists. For each of the following protection problems, tell which of these
mechanisms can be used.
(a) Ken wants his files readable by everyone except his office mate.
(b) Mitch and Steve want to share some secret files.
(c) Linda wants some of her files to be public.
