617
sewage system and caused a million liters of raw sew age to spill into the parks,
rivers and coastal waters (where fish promptly died)—as well as other places. A
less smelly but perhaps dirtier and certainly scarier example of a cyberweapon
interfering in physical affairs was Stuxnet—a highly sophisticated attack that 
damaged the centrifuges in a uranium enrichment facility in Natanz, Iran, and is said to
have caused a significant slowdown in Iran’s nuclear program. While no one has
come forward to claim credit for this attack, something that sophisticated probably
originated with the secret services of one or more countries hostile to Iran.
9.1.6 Can We Build Secure Systems?
Nowadays, it is hard to open a newspaper without reading yet another story
about attackers breaking into computer systems, stealing information, or 
controlling millions of computers. A naive person might logically ask two questions
concerning this state of affairs:
1. Is it possible to build a secure computer system?
2. If so, why is it not done?
The answer to the first one is: ‘‘In theory, yes.’’ In principle, software and hardware
can be free of bugs and we can even verify that it is secure—as long as that 
software or hardware is not too large or complicated. Unfortunately, computer systems
today are horrendously complicated and this has a lot to do with the second 
question. The second question, why secure systems are not being built, comes down to
two fundamental reasons. First, current systems are not secure but users are 
unwilling to throw them out. If Microsoft were to announce that in addition to Windows
it had a new product, SecureOS, that was resistant to viruses but did not run 
Windows applications, it is far from certain that every person and company would drop
Windows like a hot potato and buy the new system immediately.
In fact, Microsoft has had a highly secure operating system, Singularity, for
years, but decided not to market it (Larus and Hunt, 2010). Since Windows 11 is
based on a hypervisor, it would be easy to ship Windows 11 with two prebuilt 
virtual machines, Windows 11 and Singularity, and over a period of years gradually
migrate security-sensitive applications to Singularity, but management decided not
to do this for reasons best known to it.
The second issue is more subtle. The only known way to build a secure system
is to keep it simple. Features are the sworn enemy of security. The good folks in
the Marketing Dept. at most tech companies believe (rightly or wrongly, mostly
wrongly) that what users desperately want is more features, bigger features, better
features, sexier features, and ever more useless features. They make sure that the
system architects designing their products get the word. However, all these mean
more complexity, more code, more bugs, and more security errors.
SEC. 9.1
FUNDAMENTALS OF OPERATING SYSTEM SECURITY
