1060
OPERATING SYSTEM DESIGN
CHAP. 12
www.cs.vu.nl/~ast/ indicates a specific machine (www) in a specific department
(cs) at specific university (vu) in a specific country (nl). The part after the slash
indicates a specific file on the designated machine, in this case, by convention,
index.html in ast’s home directory. Note that URLs (and DNS addresses in general,
including email addresses) are ‘‘backward,’’ starting at the bottom of the tree and
going up, unlike file names, which start at the top of the tree and go down. Another
way of looking at this is whether the tree is written from the top starting at the left
and going right or starting at the right and going left.
Often naming is done at two lev els: external and internal. For example, files
always have a character-string name in ASCII or Unicode for people to use. In
addition, there is almost always an internal name that the system uses. In UNIX,
the real name of a file is its i-node number; the ASCII name is not used at all 
internally. In fact, it is not even unique, since a file may have multiple links to it. The
analogous internal name in Windows is the file’s index in the MFT. The job of the
directory is to provide the mapping between the external name and the internal
name, as shown in Fig. 12-4.
Chap-12
Chap-11
Chap-10
External name: /usr/ast/books/mos5/Chap-12
Directory: /usr/ast/books/mos5
I-node table
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
38
114
Internal name: 2
Figure 12-4. Directories are used to map external names onto internal names.
In many cases (such as the file-name example given above), the internal name
is an unsigned integer that serves as an index into a kernel table. Other examples of
table-index names are file descriptors in UNIX and object handles in Windows.
Note that neither of these has any external representation. They are strictly for use
by the system and running processes. In general, using table indices for transient
names that are lost when the system is rebooted is a good idea.
Operating systems commonly support multiple namespaces, both external and
internal. For example, in Chap. 11 we looked at three external namespaces 
supported by Windows: file names, object names, and registry names. In addition,
there are innumerable internal namespaces using unsigned integers, for example,
object handles and MFT entries. Although the names in the external namespaces
