134
PROCESSES AND THREADS
CHAP. 2
2.4.6 Mutexes
When the semaphore’s ability to count is not needed, a simplified version of
the semaphore, called a mutex, is sometimes used. Mutexes are good only for 
managing mutual exclusion to some shared resource or piece of code. They are easy
and efficient to implement, which makes them especially useful in thread packages
that are implemented entirely in user space.
A mutex is a shared variable that can be in one of two states: unlocked or
locked. Consequently, only 1 bit is required to represent it, but in practice an 
integer often is used, with 0 meaning unlocked and all other values meaning locked.
Tw o procedures are used with mutexes. When a thread (or process) needs access
to a critical region, it calls mutex lock. If the mutex is currently unlocked 
(meaning that the critical region is available), the call succeeds and the calling thread is
free to enter the critical region.
On the other hand, if the mutex is already locked, the calling thread is blocked
until the thread in the critical region is finished and calls mutex unlock. If 
multiple threads are blocked on the mutex, one of them is chosen at random and allowed
to acquire the lock.
Because mutexes are so simple, they can easily be implemented in user space
provided that a TSL or XCHG instruction is available. The code for mutex lock and
mutex unlock for use with a user-level threads package are shown in Fig. 2-30.
The solution with XCHG is essentially the same.
mutex lock:
TSL REGISTER,MUTEX
| copy mutex to register and set mutex to 1
CMP REGISTER,#0
| was mutex zero?
JZE ok
| if it was zero, mutex was unlocked, so return
CALL thread yield 
| mutex is busy; schedule another thread
JMP mutex lock
| tr y again
ok: 
RET
| retur n to caller; critical region entered
mutex unlock:
MOVE MUTEX,#0
| store a 0 in mutex
RET 
| retur n to caller
Figure 2-30. Implementation of mutex lock and mutex unlock.
The code of mutex lock is similar to the code of enter region of Fig. 2-25 but
with a crucial difference. When enter region fails to enter the critical region, it
keeps testing the lock repeatedly (busy waiting). Eventually, the clock runs out and
some other process is scheduled to run. Sooner or later the process holding the lock
gets to run and releases it.
With (user) threads, the situation is different because there is no clock that
stops threads that have run too long. Consequently, a thread that tries to acquire a
lock by busy waiting will loop forever and never acquire the lock because it never
allows any other thread to run and release the lock.
