34
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
a message through a single connection, known as a lane, much like a  network
packet. This is much simpler because you do not have to ensure that all 32 bits
arrive at the destination at exactly the same time. Parallelism is still used, because
you can have multiple lanes in parallel. For instance, we may use 32 lanes to carry
32 messages in parallel. As the speed of peripheral devices like network cards and
graphics adapters increases rapidly, the PCIe standard is upgraded every 3–5 years.
For instance, 16 lanes of PCIe 4.0 offer 256 gigabits per second. Upgrading to
PCIe 5.0 will give you twice that speed and PCIe 6.0 will double that again.
Meanwhile, we still have leg acy devices for the older PCI standard. These devices
can be hooked up to a separate hub processor.
In this configuration, the CPU talks to memory over a fast DDR4 bus, to an
external graphics device over PCIe and to all other devices via a hub over a DMI
(Direct Media Interface) bus. The hub in turn connects all the other devices,
using the Universal Serial Bus to talk to USB devices, the SATA bus to interact
with hard disks and DVD drives, and PCIe to transfer Ethernet frames. We hav e
already mentioned the older PCI devices that use a traditional PCI bus.
Moreover, each of the cores has a dedicated cache and a much larger cache that
is shared between them. Each of these caches introduces yet another bus.
The USB (Universal Serial Bus) was invented to attach all the slow I/O 
devices, such as the keyboard and mouse, to the computer. Howev er, calling a 
modern USB4 device humming along at 40 Gbps ‘‘slow’’ may not come naturally for
the generation that grew up with 8-Mbps ISA as the main bus in the first IBM PCs.
USB uses a small connector with 4–11 wires (depending on the version), some of
which supply electrical power to the USB devices or connect to ground. USB is a
centralized bus in which a root device polls all the I/O devices every 1 msec to see
if they hav e any traffic. USB 1.0 could handle an aggregate load of 12 Mbps, USB
2.0 increased the speed to 480 Mbps, USB 3.0 to 5 Gbps, USB 3.2 to 20 Gbps and
USB 4 will double that. Any USB device can be connected to a computer and it
will function immediately, without requiring a reboot, something pre-USB devices
required, much to the consternation of a generation of frustrated users.
1.3.6 Booting the Computer
Very briefly, the boot process is as follows. Every PC contains a motherboard,
which contains the CPU, slots for memory chips, and sockets for PCIe (or other)
plug-in cards. On the motherboard a small amount of flash holds a program called
the system firmware, which we commonly still refer to as the BIOS (Basic Input
Output System), even though strictly speaking the name BIOS applies only to the
firmware in somewhat older IBM PC compatible machines. Booting using the
original BIOS was slow, architecture-dependent, and limited to smaller SSDs and
disks (up to 2 TB). It was also very easy to understand. When Intel proposed what
would become UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface) as a replacement,
