736
CASE STUDY 1: UNIX, LINUX, AND ANDROID 
CHAP. 10
which case the new thread is a sibling of the caller) or it can be the calling thread
itself, in which case the new thread is a child of the caller. There are a few other
bits that control other items, but they are less important.
This fine-grained sharing is possible because Linux maintains separate data
structures for the various items listed in Sec. 10.3.3 (scheduling parameters, 
memory image, and so on). The task structure just points to these data structures, so it
is easy to make a new task structure for each cloned thread and have it point either
to the old thread’s scheduling, memory, and other data structures or to copies of
them. The fact that such fine-grained sharing is possible does not mean that it is
useful, however, especially since traditional UNIX versions do not offer this 
functionality. A Linux program that takes advantage of it is then no longer portable to
UNIX.
The Linux thread model raises another difficulty. UNIX systems associate a
single PID with a process, independent of whether it is single- or multithreaded. In
order to be compatible with other UNIX systems, Linux distinguishes between a
process identifier (PID) and a task identifier (TID). Both fields are stored in the
task structure. When clone is used to create a new process that shares nothing with
its creator, PID is set to a new value; otherwise, the task receives a new TID, but
inherits the PID. In this manner, all threads in a process will receive the same PID
as the first thread in the process.
10.3.4 Scheduling in Linux
We will now look at the Linux scheduling algorithm. To start with, Linux
threads are kernel threads, so scheduling is based on threads, not processes.
Linux distinguishes the following classes of threads for scheduling purposes:
1. Real-time FIFO.
2. Real-time round robin.
3. Sporadic.
4. Timesharing.
Real-time FIFO threads are the highest priority and are not preemptable except by
a newly readied real-time FIFO thread with even higher priority. Real-time 
roundrobin threads are the same as real-time FIFO threads except that they hav e time
quanta associated with them, and are preemptable by the clock. If multiple 
realtime round-robin threads are ready, each one is run for its quantum, after which it
goes to the end of the list of real-time round-robin threads. Neither of these classes
is actually real time in any sense. Deadlines cannot be specified and guarantees are
not given. The sporadic scheduling class is used for sporadic or aperiodic threads,
and makes it possible to limit their execution time within a period, so as not to
jeopardize other real-time threads. These classes are simply higher priority than
