SEC. 1.2
HISTORY OF OPERATING SYSTEMS
19
processors. The users should not be aware of where their programs are being run or
where their files are located; that should all be handled automatically and 
efficiently by the operating system.
True distributed operating systems require more than just adding a little code
to a uniprocessor operating system, because distributed and centralized systems
differ in certain critical ways. Distributed systems, for example, often allow 
applications to run on several processors at the same time, thus requiring more complex
processor scheduling algorithms in order to optimize the amount of parallelism.
Moreover, communication delays within the network often mean that these (and
other) algorithms must run with incomplete, outdated, or even incorrect 
information. This situation differs radically from that in a single-processor system in
which the operating system has complete information about the system state.
1.2.5 The Fifth Generation (1990–Present): Mobile Computers
Ever since detective Dick Tracy started talking to his ‘‘two-way radio wrist
watch’’ in the 1940s comic strip, people have craved a communication device they
could carry around wherever they went. The first real mobile phone appeared in
1946 and weighed some 40 kilos. You could take it wherever you went as long as
you had a car in which to carry it.
The first true handheld phone appeared in the 1970s and, at roughly one 
kilogram, was positively featherweight. It was affectionately known as ‘‘the brick.’’
Pretty soon everybody wanted one. Today, mobile phone penetration in developed
countries is close to 90% of the global population. We can make calls not just with
our portable phones and wrist watches, but even with eyeglasses and other 
wearable items. Moreover, the phone part is no longer central. We receive email, surf
the Web, text our friends, play games, navigate around heavy traffic—and do not
ev en think twice about it.
While the idea of combining telephony and computing in a phone-like device
has been around since the 1970s also, the first real smartphone did not appear until
the mid-1990s when Nokia released the N9000, which literally combined two,
mostly separate devices: a phone and a Personal Digital Assistant. In 1997, 
Ericsson coined the term smartphone for its GS88 ‘‘Penelope.’’
Now that smartphones have become ubiquitous, the competition between the
operating systems is as fierce as in the PC world. At the time of writing, Google’s
Android is the dominant operating system with Apple’s iOS a clear second, but this
was not always the case and all may be different again in just a few years. If 
anything is clear in the world of smartphones, it is that it is not easy to stay king of the
mountain for long.
After all, most smartphones in the first decade after their inception were 
running Symbian OS. It was the operating system of choice for popular brands like
Samsung, Sony Ericsson, Motorola, and especially Nokia. However, other 
operating systems like RIM’s Blackberry OS (introduced for smartphones in 2002) and
