364
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
usually there are only a small number of device types and even these are generally
almost the same, or the differ in only minor ways.
The way this works is as follows. For each class of devices, such as disks or
printers, the operating system defines a set of functions that the driver must supply.
For a disk these would naturally include read and write, but also turning the power
on and off, formatting, and other disky things. Often the driver holds a table with
pointers into itself for these functions. When the driver is loaded, the operating
system records the address of this table of function pointers, so when it needs to
call one of the functions, it can make an indirect call via this table. This table of
function pointers defines the interface between the driver and the rest of the 
operating system. All devices of a given class (disks, printers, etc.) must obey it.
Another aspect of having a uniform interface is how I/O devices are named.
The device-independent software takes care of mapping symbolic device names
onto the proper driver. For example, in UNIX a device name, such as /dev/disk0,
uniquely specifies the i-node for a special file, and this i-node contains the major
device number, which is used to locate the appropriate driver. The i-node also
contains the minor device number, which is passed as a parameter to the driver in
order to specify the unit to be read or written. All devices have major and minor
numbers, and all drivers are accessed by using the major device number to select
the driver.
Closely related to naming is protection. How does the system prevent users
from accessing devices that they are not entitled to access? In both UNIX and
Windows, devices appear in the file system as named objects, which means that the
usual protection rules for files also apply to I/O devices. The system administrator
can then set the proper permissions for each device.
Buffering
Buffering is also an issue, both for block and character devices, for a variety of
reasons. To see one of them, consider a process that wants to read data from an
(VDSL—Very High Bitrate Digital Subscriber Line) modem, something many
people use at home to connect to the Internet. One possible strategy for dealing
with the incoming characters is to have the user process do a read system call and
block waiting for one character. Each arriving character causes an interrupt. The
interrupt-service procedure hands the character to the user process and unblocks it.
After putting the character somewhere, the process reads another character and
blocks again. This model is indicated in Fig. 5-15(a).
The trouble with this way of doing business is that the user process has to be
started up for every incoming character. Allowing a process to run many times for
short runs is inefficient, so this design is not a good one.
An improvement is shown in Fig. 5-15(b). Here the user process provides an
n-character buffer in user space and does a read of n characters. The 
interrupt