SEC. 11.7
INPUT/OUTPUT IN WINDOWS
981
virtual volumes presented by dynamic disks). This property makes storage spaces
much more straightforward to work with.
Since its introduction, numerous features have been added to storage spaces
beyond virtual disks. One interesting feature is called thin provisioning. This
refers to the ability to create a virtual disk that is larger than the total size of the
underlying storage pool. Actual physical storage is only allocated as the virtual
disk is used. If the available space in the storage pool starts running low, the
administrator is alerted and additional disks can be added to the pool at which
point storage spaces will automatically redistribute allocated blocks between the
new disks.
The I/O to volumes can be filtered by a special Windows driver to produce 
volume shadow copies. The filter driver creates a snapshot of the volume which can
be separately mounted and represents a volume at a previous point in time. It does
this by keeping track of changes after the snapshot point. This is very convenient
for recovering files that were accidentally deleted, or traveling back in time to see
the state of a file at periodic snapshots made in the past.
But shadow copies are also valuable for making accurate backups of server
systems. The operating system works with server applications to have them reach a
convenient point for making a clean backup of their persistent state on the volume.
Once all the applications are ready, the system initializes the snapshot of the 
volume and then tells the applications that they can continue. The backup is made of
the volume state at the point of the snapshot. And the applications were only
blocked for a very short time rather than having to go offline for the duration of the
backup.
Applications participate in the snapshot process, so the backup reflects a state
that is easy to recover in case there is a future failure. Otherwise, the backup might
still be useful, but the state it captured would look more like the state if the system
had crashed. Recovering from a system error at the point of a crash can be more
difficult or even impossible since crashes occur at arbitrary times in the execution
of the application. Murphy’s Law says that crashes are most likely to occur at the
worst possible time, that is, when the application data is in a state where recovery
is impossible.
Another aspect of Windows is its support for asynchronous I/O. It is possible
for a thread to start an I/O operation and then continue executing in parallel with
the I/O. This feature is especially important on servers. There are various ways the
thread can find out that the I/O has completed. One is to specify an event object at
the time the call is made and then wait on it eventually. Another is to specify a
queue to which a completion event will be posted by the system when the I/O is
done. A third is to provide a callback procedure that the system calls when the I/O
has completed. A fourth is to poll a location in memory that the I/O manager
updates when the I/O completes.
The final aspect that we will mention is prioritized I/O. I/O priority is 
determined by the priority of the issuing thread, or it can be explicitly set. There are
