424
INPUT/OUTPUT 
CHAP. 5
blast for 40 msec and x/4 joules running at half speed. If a video player can
decompress and display a frame in 20 msec, the operating system can run at full
power for 20 msec and then shut down for 20 msec for a total energy usage of x/2
joules. Alternatively, it can run at half power and just make the deadline, but use
only x/4 joules instead. A comparison of running at full speed and full power for
some time interval and at half speed and one-quarter power for twice as long is
shown in Fig. 5-40. In both cases the same work is done, but in Fig. 5-40(b) only
half the energy is consumed doing it.
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0 0
T/2
T
Time
Power
(a)
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0 0
T/2
T
Time
Power
(b)
Figure 5-40. (a) Running at full clock speed. (b) Cutting voltage by two cuts
clock speed by two and power consumption by four.
In a similar vein, if a user is typing at 1 char/sec, but the work needed to 
process the character takes 100 msec, it is better for the operating system to detect the
long idle periods and slow the CPU down by a factor of 10. In short, running
slowly is more energy efficient than running quickly.
In general, CPUs have sev eral sleep modes, typically referred to as C-states.
C0 is the active state, while C1–Cn represent sleep states, whereby the processor
clock is stopped (and no instructions are executed) and certain parts of the CPU are
powered down. Figure 5-41 shows an example of some of the C-states of a 
modern processor. The transition from C0 to a higher C-state can be triggered by 
special instructions. For instance, on Intel x86 the HLT instruction will drive the CPU
from C0 to C1, while the MWAIT <new C-state> instruction allows the operating
system to specify the new C-state explicitly. Specific events (such as interrupts)
trigger a return to the active state C0.
Processors may have additional modes to save power further. For instance, a
set of predefined power states (or P-states) that control both the frequency and the
voltage at which the processor operates. In other words, these are not sleep states,
but (slower or faster) forms of the active state. For instance, in P0, a specific 
processor may operate at its maximum performance of 3.6GHz and 1.4V, in P1 at
3.4GHz and 1.35V and so on, until we get to a minimum level of, say, 2.8GHz and
1.2V. These power states may be controlled by software, but often the CPU itself
tries to pick the right P-state for the current situation. For instance, when it notices
that the utilization decreases, it may try to reduce the performance and hence the
power consumption of the CPU by automatically switching to higher P-states.
