14
INTRODUCTION 
CHAP. 1
To make a long story short, MULTICS introduced many seminal ideas into the
computer literature, but turning it into a serious product and a major commercial
success was a lot harder than anyone had expected. Bell Labs dropped out of the
project, and General Electric quit the computer business altogether. Howev er,
M.I.T. persisted and eventually got MULTICS working. It was ultimately sold as a
commercial product by the company (Honeywell) that bought GE’s computer 
business when GE got tired of it and was installed by about 80 major companies and
universities worldwide. While their numbers were small, MULTICS users were
fiercely loyal. General Motors, Ford, and the U.S. National Security Agency, for
example, shut down their MULTICS systems only in the late 1990s, 30 years after
MULTICS was released, after years of begging Honeywell to update the hardware.
The last MULTICS system was shut down amid a lot of tears in October 2000.
Can you imagine hanging onto your PC for 30 years because you think it is so
much better than everything else out there? That’s the kind of loyalty MULTICS
inspired—and for good reason. It was hugely important.
By the end of the 20th century, the concept of a computer utility had fizzled
out, but it came back in the form of cloud computing, in which relatively small
computers (including smartphones, tablets, and the like) are connected to servers in
vast and distant data centers where all the computing is done, with the local 
computer mostly handling the user interface. The motivation here is that most people
do not want to administrate an increasingly complex and evolving computer 
system and would prefer to have that work done by a team of professionals, for 
example, people working for the company running the data center.
Despite its lack of commercial success, MULTICS had a huge influence on
subsequent operating systems (especially UNIX and its derivatives, Linux, macOS,
iOS, and FreeBSD). It is described in several papers and a book (Corbato´ and
Vyssotsky, 1965; Daley and Dennis, 1968; Organick, 1972; Corbato´ et al., 1972;
and Saltzer, 1974). It also has an active Website, located at www.multicians.org,
with much information about the system, its designers, and its users.
Another major development during the third generation was the phenomenal
growth of minicomputers, starting with the DEC PDP-1 in 1961. The PDP-1 had
only 4K of 18-bit words, but at $120,000 per machine (less than 5% of the price of
a 7094), it sold like hotcakes. For certain kinds of nonnumerical work, it was
almost as fast as the 7094 and gav e birth to a whole new industry. It was quickly
followed by a series of other PDPs (unlike IBM’s family, all incompatible) 
culminating in the PDP-11.
One of the computer scientists at Bell Labs who had worked on the MULTICS
project, Ken Thompson, subsequently found a small PDP-7 minicomputer that no
one was using and set out to write a stripped-down, one-user version of MULTICS.
This work later developed into the UNIX operating system, which became popular
in the academic world, with government agencies, and with many companies.
The history of UNIX has been told elsewhere (e.g., Salus, 1994). Part of that
story will be given in Chap. 10. For now, suffice it to say that because the source
